 

 

 

 

VA MASTER SPECIFICATIONS 

 

Prepared For 

 

IMPROVE OUTPATIENT SPECIALTY CLINIC 
SUPPORT AREAS 

 

Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BES DESIGN/BUILD, LLC | 766 MIDDLE STREET, FAIRHOPE, A: 36532 | PHONE: 251.990.5778 | FAX: 251.990.3716 

Submittal Date: March 2015 

 

CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENT SUBMISSION 


 

 

DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS 

 

 

VHA MASTER SPECIFICATIONS 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Section 00 01 10 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 00 - SPECIAL SECTIONS 

DATE 

00 05 01 

Special Requirements for Work Within a VA Hospital 

11-14 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 01 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

 

 

 

 

01 00 00 

General Requirements 

10-14 

01 33 23 

Shop Drawings, Product Data, and Samples 

03-12 

01 35 26 

Safety Requirements 

10-14 

01 42 19 

Reference Standards 

09-11 

01 57 19 

Temporary Environmental Controls 

01-11 

01 58 16 

Temporary Interior Signage 

08-11 

01 74 19 

Construction Waste Management 

09-13 

01 77 01 

Final Cleaning 

11-14 

01 81 11 

Sustainable Design Requirements 

02-13 

01 91 00 

General Commissioning Requirements 

06-13 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 02 – EXISTING CONDITIONS 

 

 

 

 

02 21 00 

Site Surveys 

05-13 

02 41 00 

Demolition 

04-13 

02 82 11 

Traditional Asbestos Abatement 

07-11 

02 82 13.19 

Asbestos Floor Tile and Mastic Abatement 

07-11 

02 83 33.13 

Lead-Based Paint Removal and Disposal 

 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 03 – CONCRETE (NOT USED) 

 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 04 – MASONRY (NOT USED) 

 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 05 – METALS 

 

 

 

 

05 50 00 

Metal Fabrications 

07-14 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 06 – WOOD,PLASTICS AND COMPOSITES 

 

 

 

 

06 10 00 

Rough Carpentry 

09-11 

06 16 63 

Cementitious Sheathing 

05-12 

06 20 00 

Finish Carpentry 

06-13 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 07 - THERMAL AND MOISTURE PROTECTION 

 

 

 

 

07 81 00 

Applied Fireproofing 

11-11 

07 84 00 

Firestopping 

10-11 

07 92 00 

Joint Sealants 

12-11 

07 95 13 

Expansion Joint Cover Assemblies 

07-14 




 

 

 

 

DIVISION 08 - OPENINGS 

 

 

 

 

08 11 13 

Hollow Metal Doors and Frames 

01-13 

08 14 00 

Interior Wood Doors 

10-12 

08 31 13 

Access Doors and Frames 

10-11 

08 33 13 

Coiling Counter Doors 

07-14 

08 41 13 

Aluminum-Framed Entrances and Storefronts 

10-11 

08 71 00 

Door Hardware 

09-14 

08 71 13 

Automatic Door Operators 

06-12 

08 71 13.11 

Low Energy Power Assist Door Operators 

12-13 

08 80 00 

Glazing 

05-14 

08 90 00 

Louvers and Vents 

10-11 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 09 – FINISHES 

 

 

 

 

09 05 16 

Subsurface Preparation for Floor Finishes 

04-14 

09 22 16 

Non-Structural Metal Framing 

10-14 

09 29 00 

Gypsum Board 

02-13 

09 30 13 

Ceramic/Porcelain Tiling 

07-14 

09 51 00 

Acoustical Ceilings 

12-13 

09 65 13 

Resilient Base and Accessories 

10-11 

09 65 16 

Resilient Sheet Flooring 

07-13 

09 65 19 

Resilient Tile Flooring 

 

09 66 23 

Epoxy Terrazzo Flooring 

 

09 91 00 

Painting 

07-13 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 10 – SPECIALTIES 

 

 

 

 

10 11 13 

Chalkboards and Markerboards 

10-11 

10 11 23 

Tackboards 

11-11 

10 14 00 

Signage 

11-11 

10 21 23 

Cubicle Curtain Tracks 

11-11 

10 26 00 

Wall and Door Protection 

01-11 

10 28 00 

Toilet, Bath, and Laundry Accessories 

11-11 

10 44 13 

Fire Extinguisher Cabinets 

 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 11 – EQUIPMENT 

 

 

 

 

11 73 00 

Ceiling Mounted Patient Lift System 

09-14 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 12 – FURNISHINGS 

 

 

 

 

12 24 00 

Window Shades 

11-11 

12 32 00 

Manufactured Wood Casework 

11-11 

12 36 00 

Countertops 

06-13 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 13 - SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION 

 

 

 

 

13 05 41 

Seismic Restraint Requirements for Non-Structural 
Components 

01-14 

 

 

 




 

DIVISION 14– CONVEYING EQUIPEMENT (NOT USED) 

 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 21- FIRE SUPPRESSION 

 

 

 

 

21 05 11 

Common Work Results for Fire Suppression 

11-09 

21 08 00 

Commissioning of Fire Suppression System 

06-13 

21 13 13 

Wet-Pipe Sprinkler Systems 

05-08 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 22 – PLUMBING 

 

 

 

 

22 05 11 

Common Work Results for Plumbing 

 

22 05 23 

General Duty Valves for Plumbing Piping 

 

22 07 11 

Plumbing Insulation 

05-11 

22 08 00 

Commissioning of Plumbing Systems 

06-13 

22 11 00 

Facility Water Distribution 

01-14 

22 13 00 

Facility Sanitary and Vent Piping 

 

22 40 00 

Plumbing Fixtures 

01-14 

22 62 00 

Vacuum Systems for Laboratory and Healthcare Facilities 

08-12 

22 63 00 

Gas Systems for Laboratory and Healthcare Facilities 

12-10 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 23 – HEATING, VENTILATING, AND AIR 
CONDITIONING (HVAC) 

 

 

 

 

23 05 11 

Common Work Results for HVAC 

11-10 

23 05 41 

Noise and Vibration Control for HVAC Piping and 
Equipment 

11-10 

23 05 93 

Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC 

05-11 

23 07 11 

HVAC and Boiler Plant Insulation 

05-11 

23 08 00 

Commissioning of HVAC Systems 

06-13 

23 21 13 

Hydronic Piping 

09-12 

23 31 00 

HVAC Ducts and Casings 

03-13 

23 36 00 

Air Terminal Units 

03-10 

23 37 00 

Air Outlets and Inlets 

11-09 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 25 – INTEGRATED AUTOMATION (NOT USED) 

 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 26 – ELECTRICAL 

 

 

 

 

26 05 11 

Requirements for Electrical Installations 

12-12 

26 05 19 

Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables 

07-13 

26 05 26 

Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems 

12-12 

26 05 33 

Raceway and Boxes for Electrical Systems 

05-14 

26 09 23 

Lighting Controls 

05-14 

26 27 26 

Wiring Devices 

08-14 

26 51 00 

Interior Lighting 

08-14 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 27 – COMMUNICATIONS 

 

 

 

 

27 05 11 

Requirements for Communications Installations 

11-09 

27 05 26 

Grounding and Bonding for Communications Systems 

10-06 

27 05 33 

Raceways and Boxes for Communications Systems 

12-05 

27 15 00 

Communications Horizontal Cabling 

06-13 

27 52 23 

Nurse Call and Code Blue Systems 

06-13 




 

DIVISION 28 – ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND SECURITY 

 

 

 

 

28 31 00 

Fire Detection and Alarm 

10-11 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 31 – EARTHWORK 

 

 

 

 

31 20 00 

Earthwork 

10-12 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 32 – EXTERIOR IMPROVEMENTS 

 

 

 

 

32 05 23 

Cement and Concrete for Exterior Improvements 

05-13 

32 12 16 

Asphalt Paving 

10-09 

32 17 23 

Pavement Markings 

04-10 

32 90 00 

Planting 

10-11 

 

 

 

 

DIVISION 33 – UTILITIES (NOT USED) 

 

 

 

 

 

ATTACHMENTS 

 

APPENDIX A 

Construction Indoor Air Quality Management Plan 

 

APPENDIX B 

Guiding Principle Checklist 

 

APPENDIX C 

LEED Construction Credits 

 

APPENDIX D 

Lighting / HVAC Prescriptive Requirements 

 

APPENDIX E 

Commissioning Plan 

 

 

 

 



 


 

SECTION 00 05 01 

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR WORK WITHIN A VA HOSPITAL 

 

1.GENERAL: 

 

A. This section is to bring to the attention of the contractor, 
Special Requirements of our hospital. Our primary goal is to 
provide safe, accurate, comfortable treatment and diagnostic work. 
The construction project is secondary. The prints may show 
phasing but cannot convey every consideration that must be given 
to implement the plan. Close coordination and advance 
notifications must be provided. The VA cannot tolerate the method 
of construction as would be done in an empty building for example. 
Therefore, the contractor shall plan for cleanliness, dust 
proofing, quietness, etc., as needed. 

 

The following are considerations and requirements needed in order 
to work at the hospital. 

 

B. Requirements: 

INFECTION CONTROL PROCEDURES 

TO BE APPLIED TO ALL CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS 

 

1. The overriding principal is to work within an area that is 
under negative pressure and contain all dust within the 
construction area. The contractor must organize whatever is 
necessary in order to achieve this. 


In order to accomplish the above, the CUBE method will be used. 
This method demands that a CUBE consisting of the floor, walls 
both above and below suspended ceilings and the deck above be 
established and maintained while construction is being 
performed. Walls may have to be built by the contractor if the 
existing walls cannot be utilized. The CUBE will be kept under 
negative pressure. In addition to containing dust within the 
work area, dust must be kept from exiting the work area via 
footsteps and cart wheels. 

The project will have an ICRA (Infection Control Risk 
Assessment) completed prior to any construction or phase of 
construction. This document will be posted and maintained at 


the construction site and serve as reminder of the precautions 
to be followed. The ICRA will address the following: 

 

ICRA 

. To be posted before any work is done and reviewed at each 
phase for any adjustment needed. 
. To be initiated by IC (Infection Control department) or 
Engineering and signed off by both parties. 
. ICRA forms will be kept by Safety and IC. 


Infection Control briefing 

. An overview of infection control will be given at the 
preconstruction conference. 
. Superintendant will be required to attend the preconstruction 
conference. 


Barrier plan 

. Contractor will sketch out the placements of his barrier(s) 
and get approval by IC via the COTR. 
. Barrier will be inspected by IC before each phase is started. 
. Hard wall (drywall and metal studs) barriers will be used for 
work lasting longer than 24 hours. Tape and floating will 
not be needed. Joints will be covered with blue painters 
tape including attachment at walls, floors and ceilings. 
. Plastic (fire-resistive ) can be used for work lasting 24 
hours or less on barriers below ceilings. Plastic may be 
used for periods exceeding 24 hours above ceilings. 
. The contractor may use the VA’s Curtain-Wall system utilizing 
his own plastic. 
. Barrier must also serve as physical barrier for when the area 
is not occupied by contactors. Entry will be via an actual 
door and frame and will be locked when not occupied. 


Negative Air 

. Existing ceilings may be used as part of the CUBE barrier. 
. Minus .03 inches of water pressure must be maintained. The 
contractor is responsible for providing negative air unit(s) 
as needed to maintain .03 inches of pressure. Contractor 



must install a manometer with a scale of 0-1/2 inch water for 
each pressure area. 
. Discharge into a corridor via a grill. The VA must prove 
that air discharged is clean (HEPA) via a particle meter 
before the unit is turned on and any work started. 


Mats 

. Carpet shall not be used. Contractor must clean his wheels 
and feet in the anteroom so that no dust is tracked down the 
hall. 
. Sticky mats will be used in class 3 and 4 construction and 
will be changed every 4 hours. 


Anteroom 

. Serves as an air lock and a place to remove dust from people, 
carts, feet, etc. 
. Can be built inside the construction area or if built in the 
corridor, 5 feet clearance must be maintained. 
. Must be hard walls. 
. Air flow will be from the outside common space into the 
anteroom and then into the construction area. 


Gross demolition 

. Tyvek coveralls and disposable shoe covers must be worn 
during gross demolition phase which is defined as wall, 
ceiling and flooring removal. 
. Use covered carts or containers when transporting waste down 
approved routes. 
. Disposable items are to be used one time. 
. Must be removed in the ante room before leaving the work 
area. 


Existing HVAC Grills 

. Must seal all grills – supply, return, and exhaust. 
. Seal by substantial method to prevent barrier from coming 
loose. Use blue painter tape only and do not use duct tape 
anywhere. 



Above Ceiling Inspections – as part of work planning 

. Allowed to remove one tile per 50 square feet for inspection 
with no IC control. 
. No work will be allowed without IC control with the exception 
of allowing cable pulling which may be done with the CUBE 
method. 


Fire or Smoke barriers 

. Temporary barriers must be built to give the same rating 
through an alternate path when existing barriers must be 
compromised. 
. Permanent new rated walls and ceilings (as needed) will be 
built before existing rated barriers are compromised. 


 

General 

. Clean the work area daily to control the amount of 
accumulated dust from collecting within the work area. 
. Ceiling T-grids must be vacuumed before tile is placed. 
. Utility runs that don’t necessarily have work contained to a 
room will still have to confirm to the CUBE method. A 
plastic barrier will have to be placed over the location of a 
utility run and secured to the remaining ceiling in 
conjunction with existing walls and / or barrier walls. 


2. Telephone and Computer Wiring: 

 

All telephone and computer jacks shall be removed by the VA as 
needed. At the pre-construction walkthrough, the contractor 
shall discuss timeframes for removal with the COTR (Contracting 
Officer’s Technical Representative) who will contact the VA’s 
telecommunications group for actual removal. THE CONTRACTOR 
SHALL NOT ATTEMPT ANY REMOVAL INCLUDING THE UNPLUGGING OF 
PHONES AND COMPUTERS. 

 

3. The Fire Alarm devices – smoke detectors, heat detectors and 
pull stations, are all addressed devices. Do not remove any of 
these devices. If they must be removed, please contact the 
COTR. 

 


4. Penetrations through floors and rated walls must be firestopped 
with materials made from the specific application at 
hand. Sealing must be done at the time the penetration is made 
and not done at the end of the job. 

 

5. No temporary or permanent wireless access point or WIFI will be 
set up inside or outside any VA Building. 

 

 

C. Materials to be turned over for maintenance stock: 

 

1. The contractor will turn over no less than 3 % of each product 
used for station stock. 

 

2. Materials to be turned over is limited to flooring (roll carpet 
is not needed) and specialty ceiling tile. Turn over material 
in original containers. 

 

D. Electric outlets and Data jacks : 

 

1. Every job results in the need for additional electric and data 
jacks needed. The contractor will include in his price, work 
to install electric outlets and data jacks as directed. 

 

2. The outlets and jacks will be required at the very end of the 
project. The VA will survey the new space with the users and 
will give a list of where any are needed. 

 

3. The Contractor shall provide one duplex outlet (either normal or 
emergency power) and one triplex data jack per 1000 gross 
square feet (rounded) of new or renovated built. 

 

4. The VA will be entitled to a credit for any unneeded devices not 
installed. Conversely, the VA will pay for any additional 
needed. 

 

E. Other Areas of Concern: 

 

1. When construction is near sensitive areas such as surgery, 
noisy operations shall be discontinued until a more appropriate 


time, which may be after normal working hours or on weekends. 
If this has been determined, it shall be accomplished at no 
additional cost to the VA. 

 

2. The contractor shall notify the COTR in advance of operations 
that would cause disruption to the operation of the medical 
center. Examples of these disruptions are: utility shutdown, 
noise, vibration, etc. The contractor shall adjust his 
schedule to accommodate patient care activities. 

 

3. Utilities shall not be disconnected without coordination with 
the COTR. Contractors have often cut power to "their" area and 
ended up cutting off power to areas outside the construction 
site. 

 

4. Contractor shall not attempt to work an electric circuit hot. 
If necessary, a temporary electric feed will be run. 

 

5. Odors may cause problems such as painting with oil-based paint 
on a patient ward. Reasonable action such as putting an 
exhaust fan in a window or hanging plastic to isolate a painted 
area shall be needed. 

 

6. The contractor shall take all necessary precautions to ensure 
compliance with the Life Safety Code (2009) and be mindful of 
the seriousness of how this affects the invalid. The 
contractor shall not block corridors, exits or access to exits 
at any time. 

 

7. ID badges shall be worn by all workers at all times. 

 

8. The construction area shall be secure at the end of the day. 
The contractor shall have a means of preventing patients, 
employees and other unauthorized personnel from entering the 
work site. 

 

9. New fire/smoke barriers must be constructed before old barriers 
are demolished so that barrier integrity is maintained. 

 


10. The VA must insure that no asbestos containing products are 
used in construction or equipment installation. The contractor 
shall obtain MSDS sheets or product literature stating 
“CONTAINS NO ASBESTOS” for the following classifications of 
products that have had a history of containing asbestos 
products. This list does not cover all suspect items. These 
MSDS sheets will be bound and submitted as proof that the 
building materials do not contain asbestos. 

 

a. Surfacing Materials: Sprayed or toweled-on 

b. Thermal insulating products: Batts, blocks, pipe covering, 
fire doors. 

c. Textiles: Gaskets, cloth, blankets, felts, sheets, 
cords/rope/yard, tubing, tape/strip, wiring 

d. Cementitious: Concrete-like materials, corrugated, flat, 
flexible perforated laminated, roof tiles, clapboard, 
shingles-roofing/siding, pipe 

e. Paper Products: Corrugated high temperature or moderate 
temperature, indented, millboard 

f. Roofing Felts: smooth surface, mineral surface, shingles, 
pipeline 

g. Asbestos containing compounds: caulking, caulking putties, 
glues, mastics, adhesive (cold applied), joint compound, 
roofing asphalt, mastics, asphalt tile cement, roof putty, 
plaster/stucco, spackles, sealants fire/water, cements such 
as insulation cement, finishing cement, magnesia cements 

h. Asbestos ebony products: as used in electrical boxes 

i. Flooring tile and sheets goods: vinyl/asbestos tile, 
asphalt/asbestos tile, sheet goods/resilient 

j. Wall covering: Vinyl wallpaper 

k. Paints and coatings: Roof coating, air tight 

 

F. The following items are clarifications that have caused confusion 
and problems in the past: 

 

1. When painting, the entire doorframe shall be painted (excluding 
UL or other Fire Rating information). Walls shall be painted 
to a natural break of change in direction. Door silencers 
shall not be painted. 

 


2. Contractors shall mark their dumpsters so VA employees will not 
assume it is a VA dumpster. 

 

2. When excavating, the contractor shall be responsible for 
locating items within ten (10) feet as scaled from a plan. 


 

4. Operational and Maintenance Manuals (4 sets) shall be required 
for completion of the job. 

 

5. Workers parking where not permitted or without proper dash 
signage displayed, shall be ticketed. 

 

6. The VA shall not loan tools or materials to the contractor. It 
is your responsibility to furnish all labor, materials and 
equipment necessary for completion of the job. 

 

7. The job superintendent or designee shall be on site at all 
times when work is being performed. 

 

8. The contractor shall not disturb the floors due to asbestos, 
other than how shown on the plans. 

 

9. Where the contractor disturbs lawn areas, he shall aerate 
compacted areas and sod with common Bermuda. 

 

10.When ceilings are replaced or altered in height, sprinkler 
heads shall be removed to allow the tiles to be installed. The 
heads shall be adjusted in height, if necessary, and 
reinstalled. 

 

11.The VA policy is that there is no smoking in buildings or on 
rooftops. Smoking is allowed in designated areas only. 

 

 - - - END - - - 


 

 

Infection Control Construction Worksheet – Class III/IV 



 

Location of Construction: 

 

Project Start Date: 

 

Construction Foreman: 

 

Estimated Duration: 

 

Contractor Performing Work: 

 

Completion Date: 

 

Supervisor: 

 

Telephone: 



 

YES 

 

NO 

 

CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY 

 

YES 

 

NO 

 

INFECTION CONTROL RISK GROUP 

 

 

 

 

 

TYPE A: Inspection, non-invasive 
activity 

 

 

 

 

 

GROUP 1: Low Risk 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TYPE B: Small scale, short 
duration activities which 
create minimal dust. 

 

 

 

 

 

GROUP 2: Medium Risk 

 

 

 

 

 

TYPE C: Work that generates 
moderate to high 
levels of dust, requires 
demolition or removal 
of any fixed building components 
or 
assemblies; greater than 1 work 
shift for 
completion. 

 

 

 

 

 

GROUP 3: Medium/High Risk 

 

 

 

 

 

TYPE D: Major demolition and 
construction projects; requires 
consecutive work shifts. 

 

 

 

 

GROUP 4: Highest Risk 



 


 

 

NEGATIVE AIR: 

1. Existing ceilings may be used as part of the CUBE barrier. 
2. Minus .03 inches of water pressure must be maintained. The 
contractor is responsible for providing negative air unit(s) as 
needed to maintain .03 inches of pressure. Contractor must install a 
manometer with a scale of 0-1/2 inch water for each pressure area. 
3. Discharge into a corridor via a grill. The VA must prove that air 
discharged is clean (HEPA) via a particle meter before the unit is 
turned on and any work started. 


 

MATS: 

1. Carpet shall not be used. Contractor must clean his wheels and feet 
in the anteroom so that no dust is tracked down the hall. 

1. Sticky mats will be used in Class 3 and 4 construction and will be 
changed every 4 hours. 


 

ANTEROOM: 

1. Serves as an air lock and a place to remove dust from people, carts, 
feet, etc. 
2. Can be built inside the construction area or if built in the 
corridor, 5 feet clearance must be maintained. 
3. Must be hard walls. 
4. Air flow will be from the outside common space into the anteroom and 
then into the construction area. 


 

GROSS DEMOLITION: 

1. Tyvek coveralls and disposable shoe covers must be worn during gross 
demolition phase which is defined as wall, ceiling and flooring 
removal. 
2. Disposable items are to be used one time. 
3. Must be removed in the ante room before leaving the work area. 


 

EXISTING HVAC GRILLS: 

1. Must seal all grills – supply, return and exhaust. 
2. Seal by substantial method to prevent barrier from coming loose. Use 
blue painter tape only and do not use duct tape anywhere. 


 

ABOVE CEILING INSPECTIONS – as part of work planning: 

1. Allowed to remove one tile per 50 square feet for inspection with no 
IC control. 
2. No work will be allowed without IC control with the exception of 
allowing cable pulling which may be done with the CUBE method. 


 

FIRE OR SMOKE BARRIERS: 

1. Temporary barriers must be built to give the same rating through an 
alternate path when existing barriers must be compromised. 
2. Permanent new rated walls and ceilings (as needed) will be built 
before existing rated barriers are compromised. 


 

GENERAL: 

1. Clean the work area daily to control the amount of accumulated dust from collecting within the work 
area. 
2. Ceiling T-grids must be vacuumed before tile is placed. 
3. Utility runs that don’t necessarily have work contained to a room will still have to conform to the 
CUBE method. A plastic barrier will have to be placed over the location of a utility run and secured to 
the remaining ceiling in conjunction with existing walls and/or barrier walls. 


 


IC Matrix - Class of Precautions: Construction Project by Patient Risk 

Construction Project Type 

 

Patient Risk Group 

 

TYPE A 

 

TYPE B 

 

TYPE C 

 

TYPE D 

 

LOW Risk Group 

 

I 

 

II 

 

II 

 

III/IV 

 

MEDIUM Risk Group 

 

I 

 

II 

 

III 

 

IV 

 

MEDIUM/HIGH Risk Group 

 

I 

 

II 

 

III/IV 

 

IV 

 

HIGHEST Risk Group 

 

II 

 

III/IV 

 

III/IV 

 

IV 



Note Infection Control approval will be required when the Construction Activity 
and Risk Level indicate that Class III or Class IV control procedures are 
necessary. 

Areas surrounding the project area, assessing potential impact 

 

Unit Below 

 

Unit Above 

 

Lateral 

 

Lateral 

 

Behind 

 

Front 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Risk Group- 
NA 

 

Risk Group- 
NA 

 

Risk Group- 
High 

 

Risk Group 

 

Risk Group- 
NA 

 

Risk Group- 
High 



 

 

NOTE: 

General Requirements: 

. Vacuum off dust, construction dust, drywall dust and mud, etc. before leaving 
Class II, III, or IV Containment. 
. Do not use dry dust mop. Use damp mop, dust control spray, or dust control 
sweeping compound. 
. Use walk-off mats in Class II, III, or IV Containment. 


NOISE AND VIBRATION: 

 

 

 

Site inspection and detail of plan: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Date: 

 

 

 

Infection Control: Jamie Yarberry 

 

Engineering: Jon Miller 

 

Safety: Kim Mashburn 

 

 



 


SECTION 01 00 00 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1.1 GENERAL INTENTION 

1.2 STATEMENT OF BID ITEM(S) – N/A 

1.3 SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS FOR CONTRACTOR 

1.4 CONSTRUCTION SECURITY REQUIREMENTS 

1.5 FIRE SAFETY 

1.6 OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS 

1.7 ALTERATIONS 

1.8 INFECTION PREVENTION MEASURES 

1.9 DISPOSAL AND RETENTION 

1.10 PROTECTION OF EXISTING VEGETATION, STRUCTURES, EQUIPMENT, UTILITIES, AND 
IMPROVEMENTS 

1.11 RESTORATION 

1.12 PHYSICAL DATA – N/A 

1.13 PROFESSIONAL SURVEYING SERVICES – N/A 

1.14 LAYOUT OF WORK 

1.15 AS-BUILT DRAWINGS 

1.16 USE OF ROADWAYS 

1.17 PROJECT ENGINEER’S FIELD OFFICE – N/A 

1.18 TEMPORARY USE OF MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 

1.19 TEMPORARY USE OF EXISTING ELEVATORS 

1.20 TEMPORARY USE OF NEW ELEVATORS 

1.21 TEMPORARY TOILETS 

1.22 AVAILABILITY AND USE OF UTILITY SERVICES 

1.23 NEW TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT- N/A 

1.24 TESTS 

1.25 INSTRUCTIONS 

1.26 GOVERNMENT-FURNISHED PROPERTY – N/A 

1.27 RELOCATED EQUIPMENT ITEMS – N/A 

1.28 STORAGE SPACE FOR DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS EQUIPMENT-N/A 

1.29 CONSTRUCTION SIGN – N/A 

1.30 SAFETY SIGN – N/A 

1.31 CONSTRUCTION DIGITAL IMAGES – N/A 

1.32 FINAL ELEVATION DIGITAL IMAGES – N/A 

1.33 HISTORIC PRESERVATION 


SECTION 01 00 00 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

 

1.1 GENERAL INTENTION 

 

A. Contractor shall completely prepare site for building operations, 
including demolition and removal of existing structures, and furnish 
labor and materials and perform work for PRIMARY CARE EXPANSION PROJECT 
as required by drawings and specifications. 

B. Before placement and installation of work subject to tests by testing 
laboratory retained by Department of Veterans Affairs, the Contractor 
shall notify the Project Engineer in sufficient time to enable testing 
laboratory personnel to be present at the site in time for proper taking 
and testing of specimens and field inspection. Such prior notice shall 
be not less than three work days unless otherwise designated by the 
Project Engineer. 

C. All employees of general contractor and subcontractors shall comply with 
VA security management program and obtain Identification Badges. 

D. Prior to commencing work, general contractor shall provide proof that a 
OSHA certified “competent person” (CP) (29 CFR 1926.20(b)(2) will 
maintain a presence at the work site whenever the general or 
subcontractors are present. 

E. Training: 

 

1. Beginning July 31, 2005, all employees of general contractor or 
subcontractors shall have the 10-hour OSHA certified Construction 
Safety course and other relevant competency training, as determined 
by VA CP with input from the ICRA team. 

 

2. Submit training records of all such employees for approval before the 
start of work. 

 

1.2 STATEMENT OF BID ITEM(S) – NA 

 

1.3 SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS FOR CONTRACTOR 

 

A. Additional sets of drawings may be made by the Contractor, at 
Contractor's expense, from reproducible sepia prints furnished by 
Issuing Office. Such sepia prints shall be returned to the Issuing 
Office immediately after printing is completed. 

 

1.4 CONSTRUCTION SECURITY REQUIREMENETS 

 

A. Security Plan: 

 

1. The security plan defines both physical and administrative security 
procedures that will remain effective for the entire duration of the 
project. 

 

2. The General Contractor is responsible for assuring that all subcontractors 
working on the project and their employees also comply 
with these regulations. 

 

B. Security Procedures: 

 


1. General Contractor’s employees shall not enter the project site 
without appropriate badge. They may also be subject to inspection of 
their personal effects when entering or leaving the project site. 

 

2. For working outside the “regular hours” as defined in the contract, 
The General Contractor shall give 3 days notice to the Contracting 
Officer so that security arrangements can be provided for the 
employees. This notice is separate from any notices required for 
utility shutdown described later in this section. 

 

3. No photography of VA premises is allowed without written permission 
of the Contracting Officer. 

 

4. VA reserves the right to close down or shut down the project site and 
order General Contractor’s employees off the premises in the event of 
a national emergency. The General Contractor may return to the site 
only with the written approval of the Contracting Officer. 

 

C. Key Control: 

 

1. The General Contractor shall turn over all permanent lock cylinders 
to the VA locksmith for permanent installation. See Section 08 71 00, 
Door Hardware and coordinate. 

 

1.5 FIRE SAFETY 

 

A. Applicable Publications: Publications listed below form part of this 
Article to extent referenced. Publications are referenced in text by 
basic designations only. 

 

1. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

E84-2007.............Surface Burning Characteristics of Building 
Materials 

 

2. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

 

10-2006..............Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers 

30-2003..............Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code 

51B-2003.............Standard for Fire Prevention During Welding, 
Cutting and Other Hot Work 

70-2005..............National Electrical Code 

241-2004.............Standard for Safeguarding Construction, 
Alteration, and Demolition Operations 

 

3. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA): 

 

29 CFR 1926..........Safety and Health Regulations for Construction 

 

B. Fire Safety Plan: Establish and maintain a fire protection program in 
accordance with 29 CFR 1926. Prior to start of work, prepare a plan 
detailing project-specific fire safety measures, including periodic 
status reports, and submit to Project Engineer for review for compliance 
with contract requirements in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP 
DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA AND SAMPLES. Prior to any worker for the 
contractor or subcontractors beginning work, they shall undergo a safety 
briefing provided by the general contractor’s competent person per OSHA 
requirements. This briefing shall include information on the 
construction limits, VAMC safety guidelines, means of egress, break 
areas, work hours, locations of restrooms, use of VAMC equipment, etc. 



Documentation shall be provided to the Project Engineer that individuals 
have undergone contractor’s safety briefing. 


 

C. Site and Building Access: Maintain free and unobstructed access to 
facility emergency services and for fire, police and other emergency 
response forces in accordance with NFPA 241. 

D. Separate temporary facilities, such as trailers, storage sheds, and 
dumpsters, from existing buildings and new construction by distances in 
accordance with NFPA 241. For small facilities with less than 6 m (20 
feet) exposing overall length, separate by 3m (10 feet). 

 

E. Temporary Construction Partitions: 

 

1. Install and maintain temporary construction partitions to provide 
separations between construction areas and adjoining areas. Construct 
partitions of gypsum board or treated plywood (flame spread rating of 
25 or less in accordance with ASTM E84) on both sides of fire 
retardant treated wood or metal steel studs. At door openings, 
install1 ¾ solid core doors with self-closing devices. 

 

2. Install temporary construction partitions as shown on drawings to 
maintain integrity of existing exit stair enclosures, exit 
passageways, fire-rated enclosures of hazardous areas, horizontal 
exits, smoke barriers, vertical shafts and openings enclosures. 

 

3. Close openings in smoke barriers and fire-rated construction to 
maintain fire ratings. Seal penetrations with listed throughpenetration 
firestop materials promptly in accordance with Section 07 
84 00, FIRE-STOPPING. 

 

F. Temporary Heating and Electrical: Install, use and maintain 
installations in accordance with 29 CFR 1926, NFPA 241 and NFPA 70. 

 

G. Means of Egress: Do not block exiting for occupied buildings, including 
paths from exits to roads. Minimize disruptions and coordinate with 
Project Engineer. 

 

H. Egress Routes for Construction Workers: Maintain free and unobstructed 
egress. Inspect daily. Report findings and corrective actions weekly to 
Project Engineer. 

 

I. Fire Extinguishers: Provide and maintain extinguishers in construction 
areas and temporary storage areas in accordance with 29 CFR 1926, NFPA 
241 and NFPA 10. 

 

J. Flammable and Combustible Liquids: Store, dispense and use liquids in 
accordance with 29 CFR 1926, NFPA 241 and NFPA 30. 

 

K. Existing Fire Protection: Do not impair automatic sprinklers, smoke and 
heat detection, and fire alarm systems, except for portions immediately 
under construction, and temporarily for connections. Provide fire watch 
for impairments more than 4 hours in a 24-hour period. Request 
interruptions in accordance with Article, OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS, 
and coordinate with Project Engineer. All existing or temporary fire 
protection systems (fire alarms, sprinklers) located in construction 
areas shall be tested as coordinated with the medical center. Parameters 
for the testing and results of any tests performed shall be recorded by 
the medical center and copies provided to the Project Engineer. 

 


L. Smoke Detectors: Prevent accidental operation. Remove temporary covers 
at end of work operations each day. Coordinate with Project Engineer. 

 

M. Hot Work: Perform and safeguard hot work operations in accordance with 
NFPA 241 and NFPA 51B. Coordinate with Project Engineer. Prepare permits 
at least 8 hours in advance. Designate contractor's responsible 
project-site fire prevention program manager to permit hot work. 

N. Fire Hazard Prevention and Safety Inspections: Inspect entire 
construction areas weekly. Coordinate with, and report findings and 
corrective actions weekly to Project Engineer. 

 

O. Smoking: Smoking is prohibited inside existing buildings and additions 
under construction. 

 

P. Dispose of waste and debris in accordance with NFPA 241. Remove from 
buildings daily. 

 

Q. Perform other construction, alteration and demolition operations in 
accordance with 29 CFR 1926. 

 

1.6 OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS 

 

A. The Contractor shall confine all operations (including storage of 
materials) on Government premises to areas authorized or approved by the 
Contracting Officer. The Contractor shall hold and save the Government, 
its officers and agents, free and harmless from liability of any nature 
occasioned by the Contractor's performance. 

 

B. Temporary buildings (e.g., storage sheds, shops, offices) and utilities 
may be erected by the Contractor only with the approval of the 
Contracting Officer and shall be built with labor and materials 
furnished by the Contractor without expense to the Government. The 
temporary buildings and utilities shall remain the property of the 
Contractor and shall be removed by the Contractor at its expense upon 
completion of the work. With the written consent of the Contracting 
Officer, the buildings and utilities may be abandoned and need not be 
removed. 

 

C. The Contractor shall, under regulations prescribed by the Contracting 
Officer, use only established roadways, or use temporary roadways 
constructed by the Contractor when and as authorized by the Contracting 
Officer. When materials are transported in prosecuting the work, 
vehicles shall not be loaded beyond the loading capacity recommended by 
the manufacturer of the vehicle or prescribed by any Federal, State, or 
local law or regulation. When it is necessary to cross curbs or 
sidewalks, the Contractor shall protect them from damage. The Contractor 
shall repair or pay for the repair of any damaged curbs, sidewalks, or 
roads. 

D. Working space and space available for storing materials shall be as 
determined by the Project Engineer. 

 

E. Workmen are subject to rules of Medical Center applicable to their 
conduct. 

 

 Execute work in such a manner as to interfere as little as possible 
with work being done by others. Keep roads clear of construction 
materials, debris, standing construction equipment and vehicles at all 
times. 

 


F. Execute work so as to interfere as little as possible with normal 
functioning of Medical Center as a whole, including operations of 
utility services, fire protection systems and any existing equipment, 
and with work being done by others. Use of equipment and tools that 
transmit vibrations and noises through the building structure, are not 
permitted in buildings that are occupied, during construction, jointly 
by patients or medical personnel, and Contractor's personnel, except as 
permitted by Project Engineer where required by limited working space. 

 

1. Do not store materials and equipment in other than assigned areas. 

 

2. Where access by Medical Center personnel to vacated portions of 
buildings is not required, storage of Contractor's materials and 
equipment will be permitted subject to fire and safety requirements. 

 

3. Contractor shall take all measures and provide all material necessary 
for protecting existing equipment and property in affected areas of 
construction against dust and debris, so that equipment and affected 
areas to be used in the Medical Centers operations will not be 
hindered. Contractor shall permit access to Department of Veterans 
Affairs personnel and patients through other construction areas which 
serve as routes of access to such affected areas and equipment. 
Coordinate alteration work in areas occupied by Department of 
Veterans Affairs so that Medical Center operations will continue 
during the construction period. 

 

G. To minimize interference of construction activities with flow of Medical 
Center traffic, comply with the following: 

 

1. Keep roads, walks and entrances to grounds, to parking and to 
occupied areas of buildings clear of construction materials, debris 
and standing construction equipment and vehicles. 

 

2. Method and scheduling of required cutting, altering and removal of 
existing roads, walks and entrances must be approved by the Project 
Engineer. 

 

1.7 ALTERATIONS 

 

A. Survey: Before any work is started, the Contractor shall make a thorough 
survey with the Project Engineer and a representative of VA AMMS 
Service, of areas of buildings in which alterations occur and areas 
which are anticipated routes of access. The COTR shall video tape the 
walk-thru documenting: 

 

1. Existing condition and types of resilient flooring, doors, windows, 
walls and other surfaces not required to be altered throughout 
affected areas of building. 

 

2. Existence and conditions of items such as plumbing fixtures and 
accessories, electrical fixtures, equipment, venetian blinds, shades, 
etc., required by drawings to be either reused or relocated, or both. 

 

3. Shall note any discrepancies between drawings and existing conditions 
at site. 

 

4. Shall designate areas for working space, materials storage and routes 
of access to areas within buildings where alterations occur and which 
have been agreed upon by Contractor and Project Engineer. 

 


B. Any items required by drawings to be either reused or relocated or both, 
found during this survey to be nonexistent, or in opinion of Project 
Engineer, to be in such condition that their use is impossible or 
impractical, shall be furnished and/or replaced by Contractor with new 
items in accordance with specifications which will be furnished by 
Government. Provided the contract work is changed by reason of this 
subparagraph B, the contract will be modified accordingly, under 
provisions of clause entitled "DIFFERING SITE CONDITIONS" (FAR 52.236-2) 
and "CHANGES" (FAR 52.243-4 and VAAR 852.236-88) of Section 00 72 00, 
GENERAL CONDITIONS. 

 

C. Re-Survey: Thirty days before expected partial or final inspection date, 
the Contractor and Project Engineer together shall make a thorough 
re-survey of the areas of buildings involved. They shall furnish a 
report on conditions then existing, of resilient flooring, doors, 
windows, walls and other surfaces as compared with conditions of same as 
noted in first condition survey report: 

 

1. Re-survey report shall also list any damage caused by Contractor to 
such flooring and other surfaces, despite protection measures; and, 
will form basis for determining extent of repair work required of 
Contractor to restore damage caused by Contractor's workmen in 
executing work of this contract. 

 

D. Protection: Provide the following protective measures: 

 

1. Wherever existing roof surfaces are disturbed they shall be protected 
against water infiltration. In case of leaks, they shall be repaired 
immediately upon discovery. 

 

2. Temporary protection against damage for portions of existing 
structures and grounds where work is to be done, materials handled 
and equipment moved and/or relocated. 

 

3. Protection of interior of existing structures at all times, from 
damage, dust and weather inclemency. Wherever work is performed, 
floor surfaces that are to remain in place shall be adequately 
protected prior to starting work, and this protection shall be 
maintained intact until all work in the area is completed. 

 

1.8 INFECTION PREVENTION MEASURES: 

 

Comply with Specification 000501 concerning dust control. 

 

1.9 DISPOSAL AND RETENTION 

A. Materials and equipment accruing from work removed and from demolition 
of buildings or structures, or parts thereof, shall be disposed of as 
follows: 

1. Reserved items which are to remain property of the Government will be 
identified at the beginning of the job. The contractor will set them 
aside for pick-up by the VA. Items that remain property of the 
Government shall be removed or dislodged from present locations in 
such a manner as to prevent damage which would be detrimental to 
re-installation and reuse. 

2. Items not reserved shall become property of the Contractor and be 
removed by Contractor from Medical Center. 

 


1.10 PROTECTION OF EXISTING VEGETATION, STRUCTURES, EQUIPMENT, UTILITIES, AND 
IMPROVEMENTS 

A. The Contractor shall preserve and protect all structures, equipment, and 
vegetation (such as trees, shrubs, and grass) on or adjacent to the work 
site, which are not to be removed and which do not unreasonably 
interfere with the work required under this contract. The Contractor 
shall only remove trees when specifically authorized to do so, and shall 
avoid damaging vegetation that will remain in place. If any limbs or 
branches of trees are broken during contract performance, or by the 
careless operation of equipment, or by workmen, the Contractor shall 
trim those limbs or branches with a clean cut and paint the cut with a 
tree-pruning compound as directed by the Contracting Officer. 

B. The Contractor shall protect from damage all existing improvements and 
utilities at or near the work site and on adjacent property of a third 
party, the locations of which are made known to or should be known by 
the Contractor. The Contractor shall repair any damage to those 
facilities, including those that are the property of a third party, 
resulting from failure to comply with the requirements of this contract 
or failure to exercise reasonable care in performing the work. If the 
Contractor fails or refuses to repair the damage promptly, the 
Contracting Officer may have the necessary work performed and charge the 
cost to the Contractor. 

 

1.11 RESTORATION 

A. Remove, cut, alter, replace, patch and repair existing work as necessary 
to install new work. Except as otherwise shown or specified, do not cut, 
alter or remove any structural work, and do not disturb any ducts, 
plumbing, steam, gas, or electric work without approval of the Project 
Engineer. Existing work to be altered or extended and that is found to 
be defective in any way, shall be reported to the Project Engineer 
before it is disturbed. Materials and workmanship used in restoring 
work, shall conform in type and quality to that of original existing 
construction, except as otherwise shown or specified. 

 

B. Upon completion of contract, deliver work complete and undamaged. 
Existing work (walls, ceilings, partitions, floors, mechanical and 
electrical work, lawns, paving, roads, walks, etc.) disturbed or removed 
as a result of performing required new work, shall be patched, repaired, 
reinstalled, or replaced with new work, and refinished and left in as 
good condition as existed before commencing work. 

 

C. At Contractor's own expense, Contractor shall immediately restore to 
service and repair any damage caused by Contractor's workmen to existing 
piping and conduits, wires, cables, etc., of utility services or of fire 
protection systems and communications systems (including telephone) 
which are indicated on drawings and which are not scheduled for 
discontinuance or abandonment. 

 

D. Expense of repairs to such utilities and systems not shown on drawings 
or locations of which are unknown will be covered by adjustment to 
contract time and price in accordance with clause entitled "CHANGES" 
(FAR 52.243-4 and VAAR 852.236-88) and "DIFFERING SITE CONDITIONS" (FAR 
52.236-2) of Section 00 72 00, GENERAL CONDITIONS. 

 

1.12 PHYSICAL DATA: NA 

 

1.13 PROFESSIONAL SURVEYING SERVICES: NA 

 


1.14 LAYOUT OF WORK 

 

A. The Contractor shall lay out the work from Government established base 
lines and bench marks, indicated on the drawings, and shall be 
responsible for all measurements in connection with the layout. The 
Contractor shall furnish, at Contractor's own expense, all stakes, 
templates, platforms, equipment, tools, materials, and labor required to 
lay out any part of the work. The Contractor shall be responsible for 
executing the work to the lines and grades that may be established or 
indicated by the Contracting Officer. The Contractor shall also be 
responsible for maintaining and preserving all stakes and other marks 
established by the Contracting Officer until authorized to remove them. 
If such marks are destroyed by the Contractor or through Contractor's 
negligence before their removal is authorized, the Contracting Officer 
may replace them and deduct the expense of the replacement from any 
amounts due or to become due to the Contractor. 

 

1.15 AS-BUILT DRAWINGS 

 

A. The contractor shall maintain one full size sets of as-built drawings 
which will be kept current during construction of the project, to 
include all contract changes, modifications and clarifications. 

 

B. All variations shall be shown in the same general detail as used in the 
contract drawings. To insure compliance, as-built drawings shall be made 
available for the Project Engineer's review, as often as requested. 

 

C. Contractor shall deliver two approved completed sets of as-built 
drawings to the Project Engineer within 15 calendar days after each 
completed phase and after the acceptance of the project by the Project 
Engineer. 

 

D. Paragraphs A, B, & C shall also apply to all shop drawings. 

 

1.16 USE OF ROADWAYS 

 

A. For hauling, use only established public roads and roads on Medical 
Center property and, when authorized by the Project Engineer, such 
temporary roads which are necessary in the performance of contract work. 
Temporary roads shall be constructed by the Contractor at Contractor's 
expense. When necessary to cross curbing, sidewalks, or similar 
construction, they must be protected by well-constructed bridges. 

 

B. When new permanent roads are to be a part of this contract, Contractor 
may construct them immediately for use to facilitate building 
operations. These roads may be used by all who have business thereon 
within zone of building operations. 

 

C. When certain buildings (or parts of certain buildings) are required to 
be completed in advance of general date of completion, all roads leading 
thereto must be completed and available for use at time set for 
completion of such buildings or parts thereof. 

 

1.17 PROJECT ENGINEER'S FIELD OFFICE: NA 

 

1.18 TEMPORARY USE OF MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 

 


A. Use of new installed mechanical and electrical equipment to provide 
heat, ventilation, plumbing, light and power will be permitted subject 
to compliance with the following provisions: 

 

1. Permission to use each unit or system must be given by Project 
Engineer. If the equipment is not installed and maintained in 
accordance with the following provisions, the Project Engineer will 
withdraw permission for use of the equipment. 

 

2. Electrical installations used by the equipment shall be completed in 
accordance with the drawings and specifications to prevent damage to 
the equipment and the electrical systems, i.e. transformers, relays, 
circuit breakers, fuses, conductors, motor controllers and their 
overload elements shall be properly sized, coordinated and adjusted. 
Voltage supplied to each item of equipment shall be verified to be 
correct and it shall be determined that motors are not overloaded. 
The electrical equipment shall be thoroughly cleaned before using it 
and again immediately before final inspection including vacuum 
cleaning and wiping clean interior and exterior surfaces. 

 

3. Units shall be properly lubricated, balanced, and aligned. Vibrations 
must be eliminated. 

 

4. Automatic temperature control systems for preheat coils shall 
function properly and all safety controls shall function to prevent 
coil freeze-up damage. 

 

5. The air filtering system utilized shall be that which is designed for 
the system when complete, and all filter elements shall be replaced 
at completion of construction and prior to testing and balancing of 
system. 

6. All components of heat production and distribution system, metering 
equipment, condensate returns, and other auxiliary facilities used in 
temporary service shall be cleaned prior to use; maintained to 
prevent corrosion internally and externally during use; and cleaned, 
maintained and inspected prior to acceptance by the Government. 

B. Prior to final inspection, the equipment or parts used which show wear 
and tear beyond normal, shall be replaced with identical replacements, 
at no additional cost to the Government. 

C. This paragraph shall not reduce the requirements of the mechanical and 
electrical specifications sections. 

 

1.19 TEMPORARY USE OF EXISTING ELEVATORS: NA 

 

1.20 TEMPORARY USE OF NEW ELEVATORS: NA 

 

1.21 TEMPORARY TOILETS 

 

A. Contractor may have for use of Contractor's workmen, such toilet 
accommodations as may be assigned to Contractor by Medical Center. 
Contractor shall keep such places clean and be responsible for any 
damage done thereto by Contractor's workmen. Failure to maintain 
satisfactory condition in toilets will deprive Contractor of the 
privilege to use such toilets. Contractor should ensure that mud, paint, 
tar, etc. is not tracked from the work site. 

 

1.22 AVAILABILITY AND USE OF UTILITY SERVICES 

 


A. The Government shall make all reasonably required amounts of utilities 
available to the Contractor from existing convenience outlets and 
supplies. Convenience outlets are located throughout the facility. The 
contractor will need to set a temporary panel for power until permanent 
panels are installed and energized before new panels are called for. 
The Contractor shall carefully conserve any utilities furnished without 
charge. 

 

B. The Contractor, at Contractor's expense and in a workmanlike manner 
satisfactory to the Contracting Officer, shall install and maintain all 
necessary temporary connections and distribution lines. Before final 
acceptance of the work by the Government, the Contractor shall remove 
all the temporary connections, distribution lines, meters, and 
associated paraphernalia. 

 

C. Heat: Furnish temporary heat necessary to prevent injury to work and 
materials through dampness and cold. Use of open salamanders or any 
temporary heating devices which may be fire hazards or may smoke and 
damage finished work, will not be permitted. Maintain minimum 
temperatures as specified for various materials: 

 

1.23 NEW TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT: NA 

 

1.24 TESTS 

 

A. Pre-test mechanical and electrical equipment and systems and make 
corrections required for proper operation of such systems before 
requesting final tests. Final test will not be conducted unless 
pre-tested. 

 

B. Conduct final tests required in various sections of specifications in 
presence of an authorized representative of the Contracting Officer. 
Contractor shall furnish all labor, materials, equipment, instruments, 
and forms, to conduct and record such tests. 

 

C. Mechanical and electrical systems shall be balanced, controlled and 
coordinated. A system is defined as the entire complex which must be 
coordinated to work together during normal operation to produce results 
for which the system is designed. For example, air conditioning supply 
air is only one part of entire system which provides comfort conditions 
for a building. Other related components are return air, exhaust air, 
steam, chilled water, refrigerant, hot water, controls and electricity, 
etc. Another example of a complex which involves several components of 
different disciplines is a boiler installation. Efficient and acceptable 
boiler operation depends upon the coordination and proper operation of 
fuel, combustion air, controls, steam, feedwater, condensate and other 
related components. 

 

D. All related components as defined above shall be functioning when any 
system component is tested. Tests shall be completed within a reasonably 
short period of time during which operating and environmental conditions 
remain reasonably constant. 

 

E. Individual test result of any component, where required, will only be 
accepted when submitted with the test results of related components and 
of the entire system. 

 

1.25 INSTRUCTIONS 

 


A. Contractor shall furnish Maintenance and Operating manuals and verbal 
instructions when required by the various sections of the specifications 
and as hereinafter specified. 

 

B. Manuals: Maintenance and operating manuals (four copies each) for each 
separate piece of equipment shall be delivered to the Project Engineer 
coincidental with the delivery of the equipment to the job site. Manuals 
shall be complete, detailed guides for the maintenance and operation of 
equipment. They shall include complete information necessary for 
starting, adjusting, maintaining in continuous operation for long 
periods of time and dismantling and reassembling of the complete units 
and sub-assembly components. Manuals shall include an index covering all 
component parts clearly cross-referenced to diagrams and illustrations. 
Illustrations shall include "exploded" views showing and identifying 
each separate item. Emphasis shall be placed on the use of special tools 
and instruments. The function of each piece of equipment, component, 
accessory and control shall be clearly and thoroughly explained. All 
necessary precautions for the operation of the equipment and the reason 
for each precaution shall be clearly set forth. Manuals must reference 
the exact model, style and size of the piece of equipment and system 
being furnished. Manuals referencing equipment similar to but of a 
different model, style, and size than that furnished will not be 
accepted. 

C. Instructions: Contractor shall provide qualified, factory-trained 
manufacturers' representatives to give detailed instructions to assigned 
Department of Veterans Affairs personnel in the operation and complete 
maintenance for each piece of equipment. All such training will be at 
the job site. These requirements are more specifically detailed in the 
various technical sections. Instructions for different items of 
equipment that are component parts of a complete system, shall be given 
in an integrated, progressive manner. All instructors for every piece of 
component equipment in a system shall be available until instructions 
for all items included in the system have been completed. This is to 
assure proper instruction in the operation of inter-related systems. All 
instruction periods shall be at such times as scheduled by the Project 
Engineer and shall be considered concluded only when the Project 
Engineer is satisfied in regard to complete and thorough coverage. The 
Department of Veterans Affairs reserves the right to request the removal 
of, and substitution for, any instructor who, in the opinion of the 
Project Engineer, does not demonstrate sufficient qualifications in 
accordance with requirements for instructors above. 

 

1.26 GOVERNMENT-FURNISHED PROPERTY: NA 

 

1.27 RELOCATED // EQUIPMENT // ITEMS: NA 

 

1.28 STORAGE SPACE FOR DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS EQUIPMENT: NA 

 

1.29 CONSTRUCTION SIGN: NA 

 

1.30 SAFETY SIGN: NA 

 

1.31 CONSTRUCTION DIGITAL IMAGES: NA 

 

1.32 FINAL ELEVATION DIGITAL IMAGES: NA 

 

1.33 HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

 


 Where the Contractor or any of the Contractor's employees, prior to, or 
during the construction work, are advised of or discover any possible 
archeological, historical and/or cultural resources, the Contractor 
shall immediately notify the Project Engineer verbally, and then with a 
written follow up. 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 01 33 23 
SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 Refer to Articles titled SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS FOR CONSTRUCTION 
(FAR 52.236-21) and, SPECIAL NOTES (VAAR 852.236-91), in Section 00 72 
00, GENERAL CONDITIONS. 

1.2 For the purposes of this contract, samples, test reports, certificates, 
and manufacturers' literature and data shall also be subject to the 
previously referenced requirements. The following text refers to all 
items collectively as SUBMITTALS. 

1.3 Submit for approval, all of the items specifically mentioned under the 
separate sections of the specification, with information sufficient to 
evidence full compliance with contract requirements. Materials, 
fabricated articles and the like to be installed in permanent work shall 
equal those of approved submittals. After an item has been approved, no 
change in brand or make will be permitted unless: 

A. Satisfactory written evidence is presented to, and approved by 
Contracting Officer, that manufacturer cannot make scheduled delivery of 
approved item or; 

B. Item delivered has been rejected and substitution of a suitable item is 
an urgent necessity or; 

C. Other conditions become apparent which indicates approval of such 
substitute item to be in best interest of the Government. 

 

1.4 Forward submittals in sufficient time to permit proper consideration and 
approval action by Government. Time submission to assure adequate lead 
time for procurement of contract - required items. Delays attributable 
to untimely and rejected submittals will not serve as a basis for 
extending contract time for completion. 

1.5 Submittals will be reviewed for compliance with contract requirements by 
Contracting Officer, and action thereon will be taken by Resident 
Engineer on behalf of the Contracting Officer. 

1.6 Upon receipt of submittals, Resident-Engineer will assign a file number 
thereto. Contractor, in any subsequent correspondence, shall refer to 
this file and identification number to expedite replies relative to 
previously approved or disapproved submittals. 

1.7 The Government reserves the right to require additional submittals, 
whether or not particularly mentioned in this contract. If additional 
submittals beyond those required by the contract are furnished pursuant 
to request therefor by Contracting Officer, adjustment in contract price 
and time will be made in accordance with Articles titled CHANGES (FAR 
52.243-4) and CHANGES - SUPPLEMENT (VAAR 852.236-88) of the GENERAL 
CONDITIONS. 

1.8 Schedules called for in specifications and shown on shop drawings shall 
be submitted for use and information of Department of Veterans Affairs 
and Architect-Engineer. However, the Contractor shall assume 
responsibility for coordinating and verifying schedules. The Contracting 
Officer and Architect- Engineer assumes no responsibility for checking 
schedules or layout drawings for exact sizes, exact numbers and detailed 
positioning of items. 

1.9 Submittals must be submitted by Contractor only and shipped prepaid. 
Contracting Officer assumes no responsibility for checking quantities or 
exact numbers included in such submittals. 


A. Submit shop drawings, schedules, manufacturers' literature and data, and 
certificates in quadruplicate, except where a greater number is 
specified. 

 

B. Submittals will receive consideration only when covered by a transmittal 
letter signed by Contractor. Letter shall be sent via first class mail 
and shall contain the list of items, name of Medical Center, name of 
Contractor, contract number, applicable specification paragraph numbers, 
applicable drawing numbers (and other information required for exact 
identification of location for each item), manufacturer and brand, ASTM 
or Federal Specification Number (if any) and such additional information 
as may be required by specifications for particular item being 
furnished. In addition, catalogs shall be marked to indicate specific 
items submitted for approval. 

1. A copy of letter must be enclosed with items, and any items received 
without identification letter will be considered "unclaimed goods" 
and held for a limited time only. 

2. Each sample, certificate, manufacturers' literature and data shall be 
labeled to indicate the name and location of the Medical Center, name 
of Contractor, manufacturer, brand, contract number and ASTM or 
Federal Specification Number as applicable and location(s) on 
project. 

3. Required certificates shall be signed by an authorized representative 
of manufacturer or supplier of material, and by Contractor. 

 

C. If submittal samples have been disapproved, resubmit new samples as soon 
as possible after notification of disapproval. Such new samples shall be 
marked "Resubmitted Sample" in addition to containing other previously 
specified information required on label and in transmittal letter. 

 

D. Approved samples will be kept on file by the Resident Engineer at the 
site until completion of contract, at which time such samples will be 
delivered to Contractor as Contractor's property. Where noted in 
technical sections of specifications, approved samples in good condition 
may be used in their proper locations in contract work. At completion of 
contract, samples that are not approved will be returned to Contractor 
only upon request and at Contractor's expense. Such request should be 
made prior to completion of the contract. Disapproved samples that are 
not requested for return by Contractor will be discarded after 
completion of contract. 

 

E. Submittal drawings (shop, erection or setting drawings) and schedules, 
required for work of various trades, shall be checked before submission 
by technically qualified employees of Contractor for accuracy, 
completeness and compliance with contract requirements. These drawings 
and schedules shall be stamped and signed by Contractor certifying to 
such check. 

1. For each drawing required, submit one legible photographic paper or 
vellum reproducible. 

2. Reproducible shall be full size. 

3. Each drawing shall have marked thereon, proper descriptive title, 
including Medical Center location, project number, manufacturer's 
number, reference to contract drawing number, detail Section Number, 
and Specification Section Number. 

4. A space 120 mm by 125 mm (4-3/4 by 5 inches) shall be reserved on 
each drawing to accommodate approval or disapproval stamp. 

5. Submit drawings, ROLLED WITHIN A MAILING TUBE, fully protected for 
shipment. 

6. One reproducible print of approved or disapproved shop drawings will 
be forwarded to Contractor. 


7. When work is directly related and involves more than one trade, shop 
drawings shall be submitted to Architect-Engineer under one cover. 

 

1.10 Submission of samples, shop drawings, test reports, certificates and 
manufacturers’ literature and data: 

A. Contractor shall make all submittals (except physical samples 
unsuitable for electronic submission) electronically through ProCore, 
a cloud based construction documentation collaboration platform. 
There is no cost to the contractor for the use of ProCore beyond 
communications costs. After the bidding process and the award of the 
construction contract, the successful contractor will be invited to 
join the project in ProCore and will be required to sign on and 
create a password. The contractor is responsible to view tutorials 
and learn the system. Visit www.procore.com or call (866) 477-6267 
for additional information. 

B. Physical samples shall be transmitted for approval to : 

 Contracting Officer (90C/NLR) 

 Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System 

 2200 Fort Roots Drive – Bldg. 41 

 No. Little Rock, AR 72114 

 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 01 35 26 
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1.1 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS ................................................................................................... 3 
1.2 DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................................ 4 
1.3 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS ................................................................................................... 5 
1.4 ACCIDENT PREVENTION PLAN (APP) ................................................................................... 6 
1.5 ACTIVITY HAZARD ANALYSES (AHAs) .............................................................................. 11 
1.6 PRECONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE .......................................................................................... 12 
1.7 “SITE SAFETY AND HEALTH OFFICER” (SSHO) and “COMPETENT PERSON” 
(CP) ........................................................................................................................................................ 13 
1.8 TRAINING ..................................................................................................................................... 14 
1.9 INSPECTIONS .............................................................................................................................. 15 
1.10 ACCIDENTS, OSHA 300 LOGS, AND MAN-HOURS ....................................................... 16 
1.11 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE) ................................................................. 17 
1.12 INFECTION CONTROL ............................................................................................................ 18 
1.13 TUBERCULOSIS SCREENING ................................................................................................ 25 
1.14 FIRE SAFETY .......................................................................................................................... 26 
1.15 ELECTRICAL ............................................................................................................................. 29 
1.16 FALL PROTECTION ................................................................................................................. 30 
1.17 SCAFFOLDS AND OTHER WORK PLATFORMS ................................................................... 31 
1.18 EXCAVATION AND TRENCHES ............................................................................................. 32 
1.19 CRANES ...................................................................................................................................... 32 
1.20 CONTROL OF HAZARDOUS ENERGY (LOCKOUT/TAGOUT) ........................................... 33 
1.21 CONFINED SPACE ENTRY ..................................................................................................... 33 
1.22 WELDING AND CUTTING ....................................................................................................... 34 
1.23 LADDERS .................................................................................................................................... 34 
1.24 FLOOR & WALL OPENINGS .................................................................................................. 34 

 

 

 


 

SECTION 01 35 26 
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

1.1 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS: 

A. Latest publications listed below form part of this Article to extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in text by basic designations 
only. 
B. American Society of Safety Engineers (ASSE): 


A10.1-2011...........Pre-Project & Pre-Task Safety and Health 
Planning 

A10.34-2012..........Protection of the Public on or Adjacent to 
Construction Sites 

A10.38-2013..........Basic Elements of an Employer’s Program to 
Provide a Safe and Healthful Work Environment 
American National Standard Construction and 
Demolition Operations 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 


E84-2013.............Surface Burning Characteristics of Building 
Materials 

D. The Facilities Guidelines Institute (FGI): 


FGI Guidelines-2010Guidelines for Design and Construction of 
Healthcare Facilities 

E. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 


10-2013..............Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers 

30-2012..............Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code 

51B-2014.............Standard for Fire Prevention During Welding, 
Cutting and Other Hot Work 

70-2014..............National Electrical Code 

70B-2013.............Recommended Practice for Electrical Equipment 
Maintenance 


70E-2012 ............Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace 

99-2012..............Health Care Facilities Code 

241-2013.............Standard for Safeguarding Construction, 
Alteration, and Demolition Operations 

F. The Joint Commission (TJC) 


TJC Manual ..........Comprehensive Accreditation and Certification 
Manual 

G. U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission 


10 CFR 20 ...........Standards for Protection Against Radiation 

H. U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA): 


29 CFR 1904 .........Reporting and Recording Injuries & Illnesses 

29 CFR 1910 .........Safety and Health Regulations for General 
Industry 

29 CFR 1926 .........Safety and Health Regulations for Construction 
Industry 

CPL 2-0.124..........Multi-Employer Citation Policy 

I. VHA Directive 2005-007 


1.2 DEFINITIONS: 

A. OSHA “Competent Person” (CP). One who is capable of identifying existing 
and predictable hazards in the surroundings and working conditions which 
are unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous to employees, and who has the 
authorization to take prompt corrective measures to eliminate them (see 29 
CFR 1926.32(f)). 

B. "Qualified Person" means one who, by possession of a recognized degree, 
certificate, or professional standing, or who by extensive knowledge, 
training and experience, has successfully demonstrated his ability to 
solve or resolve problems relating to the subject matter, the work, or 
the project. 

C. High Visibility Accident. Any mishap which may generate publicity or 
high visibility. 


D. Medical Treatment. Treatment administered by a physician or by 
registered professional personnel under the standing orders of a 
physician. Medical treatment does not include first aid treatment even 
through provided by a physician or registered personnel. 

E. Recordable Injuries or Illnesses. Any work-related injury or illness 
that results in: 

1. Death, regardless of the time between the injury and death, or the 
length of the illness; 

2. Days away from work (any time lost after day of injury/illness 
onset); 

3. Restricted work; 

4. Transfer to another job; 

5. Medical treatment beyond first aid; 

6. Loss of consciousness; or 

7. A significant injury or illness diagnosed by a physician or other 
licensed health care professional, even if it did not result in (1) 
through (6) above. 

1.3 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS: 

A. In addition to the detailed requirements included in the provisions of 
this contract, comply with 29 CFR 1926, comply with 29 CFR 1910 as 
incorporated by reference within 29 CFR 1926, comply with ASSE A10.34, 
and all applicable [federal, state, and local] laws, ordinances, 
criteria, rules and regulations. Submit matters of interpretation of 
standards for resolution before starting work. Where the requirements 
of this specification, applicable laws, criteria, ordinances, 
regulations, and referenced documents vary, the most stringent 
requirements govern except with specific approval and acceptance by the 
Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative. 

 


1.4 ACCIDENT PREVENTION PLAN (APP): 

A. The APP (aka Construction Safety & Health Plan) shall interface with 
the Contractor's overall safety and health program. Include any 
portions of the Contractor's overall safety and health program 
referenced in the APP in the applicable APP element and ensure it is 
site-specific. The Government considers the Prime Contractor to be the 
"controlling authority" for all worksite safety and health of each 
subcontractor(s). Contractors are responsible for informing their 
subcontractors of the safety provisions under the terms of the contract 
and the penalties for noncompliance, coordinating the work to prevent 
one craft from interfering with or creating hazardous working 
conditions for other crafts, and inspecting subcontractor operations to 
ensure that accident prevention responsibilities are being carried out. 
B. The APP shall be prepared as follows: 
1. Written in English by a qualified person who is employed by the 
Prime Contractor articulating the specific work and hazards 
pertaining to the contract (model language can be found in ASSE 
A10.33). Specifically articulating the safety requirements found 
within these VA contract safety specifications. 
2. Address both the Prime Contractors and the subcontractors work 
operations. 
3. State measures to be taken to control hazards associated with 
materials, services, or equipment provided by suppliers. 
4. Address all the elements/sub-elements and in order as follows: 
a. SIGNATURE SHEET. Title, signature, and phone number of the 
following: 


1) Plan preparer (Qualified Person such as corporate safety staff 
person or contracted Certified Safety Professional with 
construction safety experience); 

2) Plan approver (company/corporate officers authorized to 
obligate the company); 

3) Plan concurrence (e.g., Chief of Operations, Corporate Chief 
of Safety, Corporate Industrial Hygienist, project manager or 


superintendent, project safety professional). Provide 
concurrence of other applicable corporate and project 
personnel (Contractor). 

b. BACKGROUND INFORMATION. List the following: 

1) Contractor; 

2) Contract number; 

3) Project name; 

4) Brief project description, description of work to be 
performed, and location; phases of work anticipated (these 
will require an AHA). 

c. STATEMENT OF SAFETY AND HEALTH POLICY. Provide a copy of current 
corporate/company Safety and Health Policy Statement, detailing 
commitment to providing a safe and healthful workplace for all 
employees. The Contractor’s written safety program goals, 
objectives, and accident experience goals for this contract 
should be provided. 

d. RESPONSIBILITIES AND LINES OF AUTHORITIES. Provide the following: 

1) A statement of the employer’s ultimate responsibility for the 
implementation of his SOH program; 

2) Identification and accountability of personnel responsible for 
safety at both corporate and project level. Contracts 
specifically requiring safety or industrial hygiene personnel 
shall include a copy of their resumes. 

3) The names of Competent and/or Qualified Person(s) and proof of 
competency/qualification to meet specific OSHA 
Competent/Qualified Person(s) requirements must be attached.; 

4) Requirements that no work shall be performed unless a 
designated competent person is present on the job site; 

5) Requirements for pre-task Activity Hazard Analysis (AHAs); 

6) Lines of authority; 


7) Policies and procedures regarding noncompliance with safety 
requirements (to include disciplinary actions for violation of 
safety requirements) should be identified; 

e. SUBCONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS. If applicable, provide procedures 
for coordinating SOH activities with other employers on the job 
site: 

1) Identification of subcontractors and suppliers (if known); 

2) Safety responsibilities of subcontractors and suppliers. 

f. TRAINING. 

1) Site-specific SOH orientation training at the time of initial 
hire or assignment to the project for every employee before 
working on the project site is required. 

2) Mandatory training and certifications that are applicable to 
this project (e.g., explosive actuated tools, crane operator, 
rigger, crane signal person, fall protection, electrical 
lockout/NFPA 70E, machine/equipment lockout, confined space, 
etc…) and any requirements for periodic 
retraining/recertification are required. 

3) Procedures for ongoing safety and health training for 
supervisors and employees shall be established to address 
changes in site hazards/conditions. 

4) OSHA 10-hour training is required for all workers on site and 
the OSHA 30-hour training is required for Trade Competent 
Persons (CPs) 

g. SAFETY AND HEALTH INSPECTIONS. 

1) Specific assignment of responsibilities for a minimum daily 
job site safety and health inspection during periods of work 
activity: Who will conduct (e.g., “Site Safety and Health 
CP”), proof of inspector’s training/qualifications, when 
inspections will be conducted, procedures for documentation, 
deficiency tracking system, and follow-up procedures. 


2) Any external inspections/certifications that may be required 
(e.g., contracted CSP or CSHT) 

h. ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION & REPORTING. The Contractor shall conduct 
mishap investigations of all OSHA Recordable Incidents. The APP 
shall include accident/incident investigation procedure & 
identify person(s) responsible to provide the following to the 
Project Manager and Facility SafetyManager or Contracting Officer 
Representative: 

1) Exposure data (man-hours worked); 

2) Accident investigations, reports, and logs. 

i. PLANS (PROGRAMS, PROCEDURES) REQUIRED. Based on a risk assessment 
of contracted activities and on mandatory OSHA compliance 
programs, the Contractor shall address all applicable 
occupational risks in site-specific compliance and accident 
prevention plans. These Plans shall include but are not be 
limited to procedures for addressing the risks associates with 
the following: 

1) Emergency response ; 

2) Contingency for severe weather; 

3) Fire Prevention ; 

4) Medical Support; 

5) Posting of emergency telephone numbers; 

6) Prevention of alcohol and drug abuse; 

7) Site sanitation (housekeeping, drinking water, toilets); 

8) Night operations and lighting ; 

9) Hazard communication program; 

10) Welding/Cutting “Hot” work ; 

11) Electrical Safe Work Practices (Electrical LOTO/NFPA 70E); 

12) General Electrical Safety 

13) Hazardous energy control (Machine LOTO); 


14) Site-Specific Fall Protection & Prevention; 

15) Excavation/trenching; 

16) Asbestos abatement; 

17) Lead abatement; 

18) Crane Critical lift; 

19) Respiratory protection; 

20) Health hazard control program; 

21) Radiation Safety Program; 

22) Abrasive blasting; 

23) Heat/Cold Stress Monitoring; 

24) Crystalline Silica Monitoring (Assessment); 

25) Demolition plan (to include engineering survey); 

26) Formwork and shoring erection and removal; 

27) PreCast Concrete. 

C. Submit the APP to the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or 
Contracting Officer Representative for review for compliance with 
contract requirements in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP 
DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA AND SAMPLES 15 calendar days prior to the date 
of the preconstruction conference for acceptance. Work cannot proceed 
without an accepted APP. 

D. Once accepted by the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or 
Contracting Officer Representative, the APP and attachments will be 
enforced as part of the contract. Disregarding the provisions of this 
contract or the accepted APP will be cause for stopping of work, at the 
discretion of the Contracting Officer, until the matter has been 
rectified. 

E. Once work begins, changes to the accepted APP shall be made with the 
knowledge and concurrence of the Project Manager project 
superintendent, project overall designated OSHA Competent Person, and 
facility Safety Manager and Contracting Officer Representative. Should 


any severe hazard exposure, i.e. imminent danger, become evident, stop 
work in the area, secure the area, and develop a plan to remove the 
exposure and control the hazard. Notify the Contracting Officer within 
24 hours of discovery. Eliminate/remove the hazard. In the interim, 
take all necessary action to restore and maintain safe working 
conditions in order to safeguard onsite personnel, visitors, the public 
(as defined by ASSE/SAFE A10.34) and the environment. 

1.5 ACTIVITY HAZARD ANALYSES (AHAS): 

A. AHAs are also known as Job Hazard Analyses, Job Safety Analyses, and 
Activity Safety Analyses. Before beginning each work activity 
involving a type of work presenting hazards not experienced in previous 
project operations or where a new work crew or sub-contractor is to 
perform the work, the Contractor(s) performing that work activity shall 
prepare an AHA (Example electronic AHA forms can be found on the US 
Army Corps of Engineers web site) 
B. AHAs shall define the activities being performed and identify the work 
sequences, the specific anticipated hazards, site conditions, 
equipment, materials, and the control measures to be implemented to 
eliminate or reduce each hazard to an acceptable level of risk. 
C. Work shall not begin until the AHA for the work activity has been 
accepted by the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager /or 
Contracting Officer Representative and discussed with all engaged in 
the activity, including the Contractor, subcontractor(s), and 
Government on-site representatives at preparatory and initial control 
phase meetings. 






1. The names of the Competent/Qualified Person(s) required for a 
particular activity (for example, excavations, scaffolding, fall 
protection, other activities as specified by OSHA and/or other State 
and Local agencies) shall be identified and included in the AHA. 
Certification of their competency/qualification shall be submitted 
to the Government Designated Authority (GDA) for acceptance prior to 
the start of that work activity. 

2. The AHA shall be reviewed and modified as necessary to address 
changing site conditions, operations, or change of 
competent/qualified person(s). 


a. If more than one Competent/Qualified Person is used on the AHA 
activity, a list of names shall be submitted as an attachment to 
the AHA. Those listed must be Competent/Qualified for the type of 
work involved in the AHA and familiar with current site safety 
issues. 

b. If a new Competent/Qualified Person (not on the original list) is 
added, the list shall be updated (an administrative action not 
requiring an updated AHA). The new person shall acknowledge in 
writing that he or she has reviewed the AHA and is familiar with 
current site safety issues. 

3. Submit AHAs to the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or 
Contracting Officer Representative for review for compliance with 
contract requirements in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP 
DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA AND SAMPLES for review at least 15 calendar 
days prior to the start of each phase. Subsequent AHAs as shall be 
formatted as amendments to the APP. The analysis should be used 
during daily inspections to ensure the implementation and 
effectiveness of the activity's safety and health controls. 

4. The AHA list will be reviewed periodically (at least monthly) at the 
Contractor supervisory safety meeting and updated as necessary when 
procedures, scheduling, or hazards change. 

5. Develop the activity hazard analyses using the project schedule as 
the basis for the activities performed. All activities listed on the 
project schedule will require an AHA. The AHAs will be developed by 
the contractor, supplier, or subcontractor and provided to the prime 
contractor for review and approval and then submitted to the Project 
Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative. 

1.6 PRECONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE: 

A. Contractor representatives who have a responsibility or significant 
role in implementation of the accident prevention program, as required 
by 29 CFR 1926.20(b)(1), on the project shall attend the 
preconstruction conference to gain a mutual understanding of its 
implementation. This includes the project superintendent, subcontractor 


superintendents, and any other assigned safety and health 
professionals. 

B. Discuss the details of the submitted APP to include incorporated plans, 
programs, procedures and a listing of anticipated AHAs that will be 
developed and implemented during the performance of the contract. This 
list of proposed AHAs will be reviewed at the conference and an 
agreement will be reached between the Contractor and the Contracting 
Officer's representative as to which phases will require an analysis. 
In addition, establish a schedule for the preparation, submittal, 
review, and acceptance of AHAs to preclude project delays. 

C. Deficiencies in the submitted APP will be brought to the attention of 
the Contractor within 14 days of submittal, and the Contractor shall 
revise the plan to correct deficiencies and re-submit it for 
acceptance. Do not begin work until there is an accepted APP. 

1.7 “SITE SAFETY AND HEALTH OFFICER” (SSHO) AND “COMPETENT PERSON” (CP): 

A. The Prime Contractor shall designate a minimum of one SSHO at each 
project site that will be identified as the SSHO to administer the 
Contractor's safety program and government-accepted Accident Prevention 
Plan. Each subcontractor shall designate a minimum of one CP in 
compliance with 29 CFR 1926.20 (b)(2) that will be identified as a CP 
to administer their individual safety programs. 
B. Further, all specialized Competent Persons for the work crews will be 
supplied by the respective contractor as required by 29 CFR 1926 (i.e. 
Asbestos, Electrical, Cranes, & Derricks, Demolition, Fall Protection, 
Fire Safety/Life Safety, Ladder, Rigging, Scaffolds, and 
Trenches/Excavations). 
C. These Competent Persons can have collateral duties as the 
subcontractor’s superintendent and/or work crew lead persons as well as 
fill more than one specialized CP role (i.e. Asbestos, Electrical, 
Cranes, & Derricks, Demolition, Fall Protection, Fire Safety/Life 
Safety, Ladder, Rigging, Scaffolds, and Trenches/Excavations). 
D. The SSHO or an equally-qualified Designated Representative/alternate 
will maintain a presence on the site during construction operations in 
accordance with FAR Clause 52.236-6: Superintendence by the Contractor. 
CPs will maintain presence during their construction activities in 



accordance with above mentioned clause. A listing of the designated 
SSHO and all known CPs shall be submitted prior to the start of work as 
part of the APP with the training documentation and/or AHA as listed in 
Section 1.8 below. 
E. The repeated presence of uncontrolled hazards during a contractor’s 
work operations will result in the designated CP as being deemed 
incompetent and result in the required removal of the employee in 
accordance with FAR Clause 52.236-5: Material and Workmanship, 
Paragraph (c). 


1.8 TRAINING: 

A. The designated Prime Contractor SSHO must meet the requirements of all 
applicable OSHA standards and be capable (through training, experience, 
and qualifications) of ensuring that the requirements of 29 CFR 1926.16 
and other appropriate Federal, State and local requirements are met for 
the project. As a minimum the SSHO must have completed the OSHA 30-hour 
Construction Safety class and have five (5) years of construction 
industry safety experience or three (3) years if he/she possesses a 
Certified Safety Professional (CSP) or certified Construction Safety 
and Health Technician (CSHT) certification or have a safety and health 
degree from an accredited university or college. 

B. All designated CPs shall have completed the OSHA 30-hour Construction 
Safety course within the past 5 years. 

C. In addition to the OSHA 30 Hour Construction Safety Course, all CPs 
with high hazard work operations such as operations involving asbestos, 
electrical, cranes, demolition, work at heights/fall protection, fire 
safety/life safety, ladder, rigging, scaffolds, and 
trenches/excavations shall have a specialized formal course in the 
hazard recognition & control associated with those high hazard work 
operations. Documented “repeat” deficiencies in the execution of safety 
requirements will require retaking the requisite formal course. 

D. All other construction workers shall have the OSHA 10-hour Construction 
Safety Outreach course and any necessary safety training to be able to 
identify hazards within their work environment. 

E. Submit training records associated with the above training requirements 
to the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting 


Officer Representative for review for compliance with contract 
requirements in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, 
PRODUCT DATA AND SAMPLES 15 calendar days prior to the date of the 
preconstruction conference for acceptance. 

F. Prior to any worker for the contractor or subcontractors beginning 
work, they shall undergo a safety briefing provided by the SSHO or 
his/her designated representative. As a minimum, this briefing shall 
include information on the site-specific hazards, construction limits, 
VAMC safety guidelines, means of egress, break areas, work hours, 
locations of restrooms, use of VAMC equipment, emergency procedures, 
accident reporting etc... Documentation shall be provided to the 
Resident Engineer that individuals have undergone contractor’s safety 
briefing. 

G. Ongoing safety training will be accomplished in the form of weekly 
documented safety meeting. 

1.9 INSPECTIONS: 

A. The SSHO shall conduct frequent and regular safety inspections (daily) 
of the site and each of the subcontractors CPs shall conduct frequent 
and regular safety inspections (daily) of the their work operations as 
required by 29 CFR 1926.20(b)(2). Each week, the SSHO shall conduct a 
formal documented inspection of the entire construction areas with the 
subcontractors’ “Trade Safety and Health CPs” present in their work 
areas. Coordinate with, and report findings and corrective actions 
weekly to Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting 
Officer Representative. 

B. A Certified Safety Professional (CSP) with specialized knowledge in 
construction safety or a certified Construction Safety and Health 
Technician (CSHT) shall randomly conduct a monthly site safety 
inspection. The CSP or CSHT can be a corporate safety professional or 
independently contracted. The CSP or CSHT will provide their 
certificate number on the required report for verification as 
necessary. 

1. Results of the inspection will be documented with tracking of the 
identified hazards to abatement. 


2. The Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting 
Officer Representative will be notified immediately prior to start 
of the inspection and invited to accompany the inspection. 

3. Identified hazard and controls will be discussed to come to a mutual 
understanding to ensure abatement and prevent future reoccurrence. 

4. A report of the inspection findings with status of abatement will be 
provided to the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or 
Contracting Officer Representative within one week of the onsite 
inspection. 

1.10 ACCIDENTS, OSHA 300 LOGS, AND MAN-HOURS: 

A. Notify the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting 
Officer Representative as soon as practical, but no more than four 
hours after any accident meeting the definition of OSHA Recordable 
Injuries or Illnesses or High Visibility Accidents, property damage 
equal to or greater than $5,000, or any weight handling equipment 
accident. Within notification include contractor name; contract title; 
type of contract; name of activity, installation or location where 
accident occurred; date and time of accident; names of personnel 
injured; extent of property damage, if any; extent of injury, if known, 
and brief description of accident (to include type of construction 
equipment used, PPE used, etc.). Preserve the conditions and evidence 
on the accident site until the Project Manager and Facility Safety 
Manager or Contracting Officer Representative determine whether a 
government investigation will be conducted. 

B. Conduct an accident investigation for recordable injuries and 
illnesses, for Medical Treatment defined in paragraph DEFINITIONS, and 
property damage accidents resulting in at least $20,000 in damages, to 
establish the root cause(s) of the accident. Complete the VA Form 2162, 
and provide the report to the Project Manager and Facility Safety 
Manager or Contracting Officer Representative within 5 calendar days of 
the accident. The Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or 
Contracting Officer Representative will provide copies of any required 
or special forms. 

C. A summation of all man-hours worked by the contractor and associated 
sub-contractors for each month will be reported to the Project Manager 


and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer Representative 
monthly. 

D. A summation of all OSHA recordable accidents experienced on site by the 
contractor and associated sub-contractors for each month will be 
provided to the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or 
Contracting Officer Representative monthly. The contractor and 
associated sub-contractors’ OSHA 300 logs will be made available to the 
Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative as requested. 

1.11 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE): 

A. PPE is governed in all areas by the nature of the work the employee is 
performing. For example, specific PPE required for performing work on 
electrical equipment is identified in NFPA 70E, Standard for Electrical 
Safety in the Workplace. 
B. Mandatory PPE includes: 


1. Hard Hats – unless written authorization is given by the Project 
Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative in circumstances of work operations that have limited 
potential for falling object hazards such as during finishing work 
or minor remodeling. With authorization to relax the requirement of 
hard hats, if a worker becomes exposed to an overhead falling object 
hazard, then hard hats would be required in accordance with the OSHA 
regulations. 

2. Safety glasses - unless written authorization is given by the 
Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative appropriate safety glasses meeting the ANSI Z.87.1 
standard must be worn by each person on site. 

3. Appropriate Safety Shoes – based on the hazards present, safety 
shoes meeting the requirements of ASTM F2413-11 shall be worn by 
each person on site unless written authorization is given by the 
Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative. 


4. Hearing protection - Use personal hearing protection at all times in 
designated noise hazardous areas or when performing noise hazardous 
tasks. 

1.12 INFECTION CONTROL 

A. Infection Control is critical in all medical center facilities. 
Interior construction activities causing disturbance of existing dust, 
or creating new dust, must be conducted within ventilation-controlled 
areas that minimize the flow of airborne particles into patient areas. 
Exterior construction activities causing disturbance of soil or creates 
dust in some other manner must be controlled. 
B. An AHA associated with infection control will be performed by VA 
personnel in accordance with FGI Guidelines (i.e. Infection Control 
Risk Assessment (ICRA)). The ICRA procedure found on the American 
Society for Healthcare Engineering (ASHE) website will be utilized. 
Risk classifications of Class II or lower will require approval by the 
Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative before beginning any construction work. Risk 
classifications of Class III or higher will require a permit before 
beginning any construction work. Infection Control permits will be 
issued by the Project Manager. The Infection Control Permits will be 
posted outside the appropriate construction area. More than one permit 
may be issued for a construction project if the work is located in 
separate areas requiring separate classes. The primary project scope 
area for this project is: Class [__IV_}, however, work outside the 
primary project scope area may vary. The required infection control 
precautions with each class are as follows: 


1. Class I requirements: 

a. During Construction Work: 

1) Notify the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or 
Contracting Officer Representative 

2) Execute work by methods to minimize raising dust from 
construction operations. 

3) Ceiling tiles: Immediately replace a ceiling tiles displaced 
for visual inspection. 


b. Upon Completion: 

1) Clean work area upon completion of task 

2) Notify the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or 
Contracting Officer Representative 

2. Class II requirements: 

a. During Construction Work: 

1) Notify the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or 
Contracting Officer Representative2) Provide active means to 
prevent airborne dust from dispersing into atmosphere such as 
wet methods or tool mounted dust collectors where possible. 

3) Water mist work surfaces to control dust while cutting. 

4) Seal unused doors with duct tape. 

5) Block off and seal air vents. 

6) Remove or isolate HVAC system in areas where work is being 
performed. 

b. Upon Completion: 

1) Wipe work surfaces with cleaner/disinfectant. 

2) Contain construction waste before transport in tightly covered 
containers. 

3) Wet mop and/or vacuum with HEPA filtered vacuum before leaving 
work area. 

4) Upon completion, restore HVAC system where work was performed 

5) Notify the Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or 
Contracting Officer Representative 

3. Class III requirements: 

a. During Construction Work: 

1) Obtain permit from the Project Manager and Facility Safety 
Manager or Contracting Officer Representative2) Remove or 


Isolate HVAC system in area where work is being done to 
prevent contamination of duct system. 

3) Complete all critical barriers i.e. sheetrock, plywood, 
plastic, to seal area from non work area or implement control 
cube method (cart with plastic covering and sealed connection 
to work site with HEPA vacuum for vacuuming prior to exit) 
before construction begins. Install construction barriers and 
ceiling protection carefully, outside of normal work hours. 

4) Maintain negative air pressure, 0.01 inches of water gauge, 
within work site utilizing HEPA equipped air filtration units 
and continuously monitored with a digital display, recording 
and alarm instrument, which must be calibrated on 
installation, maintained with periodic calibration and 
monitored by the contractor. 

5) Contain construction waste before transport in tightly covered 
containers. 

6) Cover transport receptacles or carts. Tape covering unless 
solid lid. 

b. Upon Completion: 

1) Do not remove barriers from work area until completed project 
is inspected by the Project Manager and Facility Safety 
Manager or Contracting Officer Representative and thoroughly 
cleaned by the VA Environmental Services Department. 

2) Remove construction barriers and ceiling protection carefully 
to minimize spreading of dirt and debris associated with 
construction, outside of normal work hours. 

3) Vacuum work area with HEPA filtered vacuums. 

4) Wet mop area with cleaner/disinfectant. 

5) Upon completion, restore HVAC system where work was performed. 

6) Return permit to the Project Manager and Facility Safety 
Manager or Contracting Officer Representative 

4. Class IV requirements: 


a. During Construction Work: 

1) Obtain permit from the Project Manager and Facility Safety 
Manager or Contracting Officer Representative 2) Isolate 
HVAC system in area where work is being done to prevent 
contamination of duct system. 

3) Complete all critical barriers i.e. sheetrock, plywood, 
plastic, to seal area from non work area or implement control 
cube method (cart with plastic covering and sealed connection 
to work site with HEPA vacuum for vacuuming prior to exit) 
before construction begins. Install construction barriers and 
ceiling protection carefully, outside of normal work hours. 

4) Maintain negative air pressure within work site utilizing HEPA 
equipped air filtration units. 

5) Seal holes, pipes, conduits, and punctures. 

6) Construct anteroom and require all personnel to pass through 
this room so they can be vacuumed using a HEPA vacuum cleaner 
before leaving work site or they can wear cloth or paper 
coveralls that are removed each time they leave work site. 

7) All personnel entering work site are required to wear shoe 
covers. Shoe covers must be changed each time the worker 
exits the work area. 

b. Upon Completion: 

1) Do not remove barriers from work area until completed project 
is inspected by the Project Manager and Facility Safety 
Manager or Contracting Officer Representative with thorough 
cleaning by the VA Environmental Services Dept. 

2) Remove construction barriers and ceiling protection carefully 
to minimize spreading of dirt and debris associated with 
construction, outside of normal work hours. 

3) Contain construction waste before transport in tightly covered 
containers. 


4) Cover transport receptacles or carts. Tape covering unless 
solid lid. 

5) Vacuum work area with HEPA filtered vacuums. 

6) Wet mop area with cleaner/disinfectant. 

7) Upon completion, restore HVAC system where work was performed. 

8) Return permit to the Project Manager and Facility Safety 
Manager or Contracting Officer Representative 

C. Barriers shall be erected as required based upon classification (Class 
III & IV requires barriers) and shall be constructed as follows: 


1. Class III and IV - closed door with masking tape applied over the 
frame and door is acceptable for projects that can be contained in a 
single room. 

2. Construction, demolition or reconstruction not capable of 
containment within a single room must have the following barriers 
erected and made presentable on hospital occupied side: 

a. Class III & IV (where dust control is the only hazard, and an 
agreement is reached with the Resident Engineer and Medical 
Center) - Airtight plastic barrier that extends from the floor to 
ceiling. Seams must be sealed with duct tape to prevent dust and 
debris from escaping 

b. Class III & IV - Drywall barrier erected with joints covered or 
sealed to prevent dust and debris from escaping. 

c. Class III & IV - Seal all penetrations in existing barrier 
airtight 

d. Class III & IV - Barriers at penetration of ceiling envelopes, 
chases and ceiling spaces to stop movement air and debris 

e. Class IV only - Anteroom or double entrance openings that allow 
workers to remove protective clothing or vacuum off existing 
clothing 


f. Class III & IV - At elevators shafts or stairways within the 
field of construction, overlapping flap minimum of two feet wide 
of polyethylene enclosures for personnel access. 

D. Products and Materials: 


1. Sheet Plastic: Fire retardant polystyrene, 6-mil thickness meeting 
local fire codes 

2. Barrier Doors: Self Closing One-hour or Two-hour fire-rated solid 
core wood in steel frame, painted 

3. Dust proof one-hour or two-hour fire-rated drywall 

4. High Efficiency Particulate Air-Equipped filtration machine rated at 
95% capture of 0.3 microns including pollen, mold spores and dust 
particles. HEPA filters should have ASHRAE 85 or other prefilter to 
extend the useful life of the HEPA. Provide both primary and 
secondary filtrations units. Maintenance of equipment and 
replacement of the HEPA filters and other filters will be in 
accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. 

5. Exhaust Hoses: Heavy duty, flexible steel reinforced; Ventilation 
Blower Hose 

6. Adhesive Walk-off Mats: Provide minimum size mats of 24 inches x 36 
inches 

7. Disinfectant: Hospital-approved disinfectant or equivalent product 

8. Portable Ceiling Access Module 

E. Before any construction on site begins, all contractor personnel 
involved in the construction or renovation activity shall be educated 
and trained in infection prevention measures established by the medical 
center. 
F. A dust control program will be establish and maintained as part of the 
contractor’s infection preventive measures in accordance with the FGI 
Guidelines for Design and Construction of Healthcare Facilities. Prior 
to start of work, prepare a plan detailing project-specific dust 
protection measures with associated product data, including periodic 
status reports, and submit to Project Manager and Facility CSC for 



review for compliance with contract requirements in accordance with 
Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA AND SAMPLES. 
G. Medical center Infection Control personnel will monitor for airborne 
disease (e.g. aspergillosis) during construction. A baseline of 
conditions will be established by the medical center prior to the start 
of work and periodically during the construction stage to determine 
impact of construction activities on indoor air quality with safe 
thresholds established. 


H. In general, the following preventive measures shall be adopted during 
construction to keep down dust and prevent mold. 

1. Contractor shall verify that construction exhaust to exterior is not 
reintroduced to the medical center through intake vents, or building 
openings. HEPA filtration is required where the exhaust dust may 
reenter the medical center. 

2. Exhaust hoses shall be exhausted so that dust is not reintroduced to 
the medical center. 
3. Adhesive Walk-off/Carpet Walk-off Mats shall be used at all interior 
transitions from the construction area to occupied medical center 
area. These mats shall be changed as often as required to maintain 
clean work areas directly outside construction area at all times. 
4. Vacuum and wet mop all transition areas from construction to the 
occupied medical center at the end of each workday. Vacuum shall 
utilize HEPA filtration. Maintain surrounding area frequently. 
Remove debris as it is created. Transport these outside the 
construction area in containers with tightly fitting lids. 
5. The contractor shall not haul debris through patient-care areas 
without prior approval of the Resident Engineer and the Medical 
Center. When, approved, debris shall be hauled in enclosed dust 
proof containers or wrapped in plastic and sealed with duct tape. No 
sharp objects should be allowed to cut through the plastic. Wipe 
down the exterior of the containers with a damp rag to remove dust. 
All equipment, tools, material, etc. transported through occupied 
areas shall be made free from dust and moisture by vacuuming and 
wipe down. 



6. There shall be no standing water during construction. This includes 
water in equipment drip pans and open containers within the 
construction areas. All accidental spills must be cleaned up and 
dried within 12 hours. Remove and dispose of porous materials that 
remain damp for more than 72 hours. 
7. At completion, remove construction barriers and ceiling protection 
carefully, outside of normal work hours. Vacuum and clean all 
surfaces free of dust after the removal. 
I. Final Cleanup: 


1. Upon completion of project, or as work progresses, remove all 
construction debris from above ceiling, vertical shafts and utility 
chases that have been part of the construction. 

2. Perform HEPA vacuum cleaning of all surfaces in the construction 
area. This includes walls, ceilings, cabinets, furniture (built-in 
or free standing), partitions, flooring, etc. 

3. All new air ducts shall be cleaned prior to final inspection. 

J. Exterior Construction 


1. Contractor shall verify that dust will not be introduced into the 
medical center through intake vents, or building openings. HEPA 
filtration on intake vents is required where dust may be introduced. 

2. Dust created from disturbance of soil such as from vehicle movement 
will be wetted with use of a water truck as necessary 

3. All cutting, drilling, grinding, sanding, or disturbance of 
materials shall be accomplished with tools equipped with either 
local exhaust ventilation (i.e. vacuum systems) or wet suppression 
controls. 

1.13 TUBERCULOSIS SCREENING 

A. Contractor shall provide written certification that all contract 
employees assigned to the work site have had a pre-placement tuberculin 
screening within 90 days prior to assignment to the worksite and been 
found have negative TB screening reactions. Contractors shall be 
required to show documentation of negative TB screening reactions for 
any additional workers who are added after the 90-day requirement 


before they will be allowed to work on the work site. NOTE: This can 
be the Center for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention and two-step 
skin testing or a Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved blood 
test. 

1. Contract employees manifesting positive screening reactions to the 
tuberculin shall be examined according to current CDC guidelines 
prior to working on VHA property. 

2. Subsequently, if the employee is found without evidence of active 
(infectious) pulmonary TB, a statement documenting examination by a 
physician shall be on file with the employer (construction 
contractor), noting that the employee with a positive tuberculin 
screening test is without evidence of active (infectious) pulmonary 
TB. 

3. If the employee is found with evidence of active (infectious) 
pulmonary TB, the employee shall require treatment with a subsequent 
statement to the fact on file with the employer before being allowed 
to return to work on VHA property. 

1.14 FIRE SAFETY 

A. Fire Safety Plan: Establish and maintain a site-specific fire 
protection program in accordance with 29 CFR 1926. Prior to start of 
work, prepare a plan detailing project-specific fire safety measures, 
including periodic status reports, and submit to Project Manager and 
Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer Representative for 
review for compliance with contract requirements in accordance with 
Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA AND SAMPLES. This plan 
may be an element of the Accident Prevention Plan. 
B. Site and Building Access: Maintain free and unobstructed access to 
facility emergency services and for fire, police and other emergency 
response forces in accordance with NFPA 241. 


C. Separate temporary facilities, such as trailers, storage sheds, and 
dumpsters, from existing buildings and new construction by distances in 
accordance with NFPA 241. For small facilities with less than 6 m (20 
feet) exposing overall length, separate by 3m (10 feet). 

D. Temporary Construction Partitions: 


1. Install and maintain temporary construction partitions to provide 
smoke-tight separations between construction areas, the areas that 
are described in phasing requirements and adjoining areas. Construct 
partitions of gypsum board or treated plywood (flame spread rating 
of 25 or less in accordance with ASTM E84) on both sides of fire 
retardant treated wood or metal steel studs. Extend the partitions 
through suspended ceilings to floor slab deck or roof. Seal joints 
and penetrations. At door openings, install Class C, ¾ hour 
fire/smoke rated doors with self-closing devices. 

2. Install one-hour or two-hour fire-rated temporary construction 
partitions as shown on drawings to maintain integrity of existing 
exit stair enclosures, exit passageways, fire-rated enclosures of 
hazardous areas, horizontal exits, smoke barriers, vertical shafts 
and openings enclosures. 

3. Close openings in smoke barriers and fire-rated construction to 
maintain fire ratings. Seal penetrations with listed throughpenetration 
firestop materials in accordance with Section 07 84 00, 
FIRESTOPPING. 

E. Temporary Heating and Electrical: Install, use and maintain 
installations in accordance with 29 CFR 1926, NFPA 241 and NFPA 70. 

F. Means of Egress: Do not block exiting for occupied buildings, including 
paths from exits to roads. Minimize disruptions and coordinate with 
Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative. 

G. Egress Routes for Construction Workers: Maintain free and unobstructed 
egress. Inspect daily. Report findings and corrective actions weekly to 
Project Managerand Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative. 

H. Fire Extinguishers: Provide and maintain extinguishers in construction 
areas and temporary storage areas in accordance with 29 CFR 1926, NFPA 
241 and NFPA 10. 

I. Flammable and Combustible Liquids: Store, dispense and use liquids in 
accordance with 29 CFR 1926, NFPA 241 and NFPA 30. 


J. Standpipes: Install and extend standpipes up with each floor in 
accordance with 29 CFR 1926 and NFPA 241. Do not charge wet standpipes 
subject to freezing until weather protected. 

K. Sprinklers: Install, test and activate new automatic sprinklers prior 
to removing existing sprinklers. 

L. Existing Fire Protection: Do not impair automatic sprinklers, smoke and 
heat detection, and fire alarm systems, except for portions immediately 
under construction, and temporarily for connections. Provide fire watch 
for impairments more than 4 hours in a 24-hour period. Request 
interruptions in accordance with Article, OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS, 
and coordinate with Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or 
Contracting Officer Representative. All existing or temporary fire 
protection systems (fire alarms, sprinklers) located in construction 
areas shall be tested as coordinated with the medical center. 
Parameters for the testing and results of any tests performed shall be 
recorded by the medical center and copies provided to the Resident 
Engineer. 

M. Smoke Detectors: Prevent accidental operation. Remove temporary covers 
at end of work operations each day. Coordinate with Project Manager 
and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer Representative. 

N. Hot Work: Perform and safeguard hot work operations in accordance with 
NFPA 241 and NFPA 51B. Coordinate with Facility Safety Office. Obtain 
permits from facility SafetyManager at least 24 hours in advance. 
Designate contractor's responsible project-site fire prevention program 
manager to permit hot work. O. Fire Hazard Prevention and Safety 
Inspections: Inspect entire construction areas weekly. Coordinate with, 
and report findings and corrective actions weekly to Project Managerand 
Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer Representative. 

P. Smoking: Smoking is prohibited in and adjacent to construction areas 
inside existing buildings and additions under construction. In separate 
and detached buildings under construction, smoking is prohibited except 
in designated smoking rest areas. 

Q. Dispose of waste and debris in accordance with NFPA 241. Remove from 
buildings daily. 


R. If required, submit documentation to the Facility Safety Office and COR 
that personnel have been trained in the fire safety aspects of working 
in areas with impaired structural or compartmentalization features. 

1.15 ELECTRICAL 

A. All electrical work shall comply with NFPA 70 (NEC), NFPA 70B, NFPA 
70E, 29 CFR Part 1910 Subpart J – General Environmental Controls, 29 
CFR Part 1910 Subpart S – Electrical, and 29 CFR 1926 Subpart K in 
addition to other references required by contract. 

B. All qualified persons performing electrical work under this contract 
shall be licensed journeyman or master electricians. All apprentice 
electricians performing under this contract shall be deemed unqualified 
persons unless they are working under the immediate supervision of a 
licensed electrician or master electrician. 

C. All electrical work will be accomplished de-energized and in the 
Electrically Safe Work Condition ( refer to NFPA 70E for Work Involving 
Electrical Hazards, including Exemptions to Work Permit). Any 
Contractor, subcontractor or temporary worker who fails to fully comply 
with this requirement is subject to immediate termination in accordance 
with FAR clause 52.236-5(c). Only in rare circumstance where achieving 
an electrically safe work condition prior to beginning work would 
increase or cause additional hazards, or is infeasible due to equipment 
design or operational limitations is energized work permitted. The 
Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative with approval of the Medical Center Director will make 
the determination if the circumstances would meet the exception 
outlined above. An AHA specific to energized work activities will be 
developed, reviewed, and accepted prior to the start of that work. 

1. Development of a Hazardous Electrical Energy Control Procedure is 
required prior to de-energization. A single Simple Lockout/Tagout 
Procedure for multiple work operations can only be used for work 
involving qualified person(s) de-energizing one set of conductors or 
circuit part source. Task specific Complex Lockout/Tagout 
Procedures are required at all other times. 

2. Verification of the absence of voltage after de-energization and 
lockout/tagout is considered “energized electrical work” (live work) 


under NFPA 70E, and shall only be performed by qualified persons 
wearing appropriate shock protective (voltage rated) gloves and arc 
rate personal protective clothing and equipment, using Underwriters 
Laboratories (UL) tested and appropriately rated contact electrical 
testing instruments or equipment appropriate for the environment in 
which they will be used. 

3. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and electrical testing 
instruments will be readily available for inspection by the Project 
Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative. 

D. Before beginning any electrical work, an Activity Hazard Analysis (AHA) 
will be conducted to include Shock Hazard and Arc Flash Hazard analyses 
(NFPA Tables can be used only as a last alterative and it is strongly 
suggested a full Arc Flash Hazard Analyses be conducted). Work shall 
not begin until the AHA for the work activity has been accepted by the 
Project Manager and Facility Safety Manager or Contracting Officer 
Representative and discussed with all engaged in the activity, 
including the Contractor, subcontractor(s), and Government on-site 
representatives at preparatory and initial control phase meetings. 
E. Ground-fault circuit interrupters. All 120-volt, single-phase 15- and 
20-ampere receptacle outlets on construction sites shall have approved 
ground-fault circuit interrupters for personnel protection. “Assured 
Equipment Grounding Conductor Program” only is not allowed. 






1.16 FALL PROTECTION 

A. The fall protection (FP) threshold height requirement is 6 ft (1.8 m) 
for ALL WORK, unless specified differently or the OSHA 29 CFR 1926 
requirements are more stringent, to include steel erection activities, 
systems-engineered activities (prefabricated) metal buildings, 
residential (wood) construction and scaffolding work. 

1. The use of a Safety Monitoring System (SMS) as a fall protection 
method is prohibited. 

2. The use of Controlled Access Zone (CAZ) as a fall protection method 
is prohibited. 


3. A Warning Line System (WLS) may ONLY be used on floors or flat or 
low-sloped roofs (between 0 - 18.4 degrees or 4:12 slope) and shall 
be erected around all sides of the work area (See 29 CFR 1926.502(f) 
for construction of WLS requirements). Working within the WLS does 
not require FP. No worker shall be allowed in the area between the 
roof or floor edge and the WLS without FP. FP is required when 
working outside the WLS. 

4. Fall protection while using a ladder will be governed by the OSHA 
requirements. 

1.17 SCAFFOLDS AND OTHER WORK PLATFORMS 

A. All scaffolds and other work platforms construction activities shall 
comply with 29 CFR 1926 Subpart L. 

B. The fall protection (FP) threshold height requirement is 6 ft (1.8 m) 
as stated in Section 1.16. 

C. The following hierarchy and prohibitions shall be followed in selecting 
appropriate work platforms. 

1. Scaffolds, platforms, or temporary floors shall be provided for all 
work except that can be performed safely from the ground or similar 
footing. 

2. Ladders less than 20 feet may be used as work platforms only when 
use of small hand tools or handling of light material is involved. 

3. Ladder jacks, lean-to, and prop-scaffolds are prohibited. 

4. Emergency descent devices shall not be used as working platforms. 

D. Contractors shall use a scaffold tagging system in which all scaffolds 
are tagged by the Competent Person. Tags shall be color-coded: green 
indicates the scaffold has been inspected and is safe to use; red 
indicates the scaffold is unsafe to use. Tags shall be readily visible, 
made of materials that will withstand the environment in which they are 
used, be legible and shall include: 

1. The Competent Person’s name and signature; 

2. Dates of initial and last inspections. 


E. Mast Climbing work platforms: When access ladders, including masts 
designed as ladders, exceed 20 ft (6 m) in height, positive fall 
protection shall be used. 

1.18 EXCAVATION AND TRENCHES 

A. All excavation and trenching work shall comply with 29 CFR 1926 Subpart 
P. 

B. All excavations and trenches 5 feet in depth or greater shall require a 
written trenching and excavation permit (NOTE – some States and other 
local jurisdictions require separate state/jurisdiction-issued 
excavation permits). The permit shall be completed and provided to the 
Project Manager and/or Facility Safety Manager and/or other Government 
Designated Authority prior to commencing work for the day. At the end 
of the day, the permit shall be closed out and provided to the Project 
Manager and/or Facility Safety Manager and/or other Government 
Designated Authority. The permit shall be maintained onsite and 
include the following: 

1. Determination of soil classification 

2. Indication that utilities have been located and identified. If 
utilities could not be located after all reasonable attempt, then 
excavating operations will proceed cautiously. 

3. Indication of selected excavation protective system. 

4. Indication that the spoil pile will be stored at least 2 feet from 
the edge of the excavation and safe access provided within 25 feet 
of the workers. 

5. Indication of assessment for a potential toxic, explosive, or oxygen 
deficient atmosphere. 

C. If not using an engineered protective system such as a trench box, 
shielding, shoring, or other Professional Engineer designed system and 
using a sloping or benching system, soil classification cannot be Solid 
Rock or Type A. All soil will be classified as Type B or Type C and 
sloped or benched in accordance with Appendix B of 29 CFR 1926. 

1.19 CRANES 

A. All crane work shall comply with 29 CFR 1926 Subpart CC. 


B. Prior to operating a crane, the operator must be licensed, qualified or 
certified to operate the crane. Thus, all the provisions contained 
with Subpart CC are effective and there is no “Phase In” date of 
November 10, 2014. 

C. A detailed lift permit shall be submitted 14 days prior to the 
scheduled lift complete with route for truck carrying load, crane load 
analysis, siting of crane and path of swing. The lift will not be 
allowed without approval of this document. 

D. Crane operators shall not carry loads 

1. over the general public or VAMC personnel 

2. over any occupied building unless 

a. the top two floors are vacated 

b. or overhead protection with a design live load of 300 psf is 
provided 

1.20 CONTROL OF HAZARDOUS ENERGY (LOCKOUT/TAGOUT) 

A. All installation, maintenance, and servicing of equipment or machinery 
shall comply with 29 CFR 1910.147 except for specifically referenced 
operations in 29 CFR 1926 such as concrete & masonry equipment 
[1926.702(j)], heavy machinery & equipment [1926.600(a)(3)(i)], and 
process safety management of highly hazardous chemicals (1926.64). 
Control of hazardous electrical energy during the installation, 
maintenance, or servicing of electrical equipment shall comply with 
Section 1.15 to include NFPA 70E and other VA specific requirements 
discussed in the section. 

1.21 CONFINED SPACE ENTRY 

A. All confined space entry shall comply with 29 CFR 1910.146 except for 
specifically referenced operations in 29 CFR 1926 such as 
excavations/trenches [1926.651(g)]. 

B. A site-specific Confined Space Entry Plan (including permitting 
process) shall be developed and submitted to the Project Manager and/or 
Facility Safety Manager and/or other Government Designated Authority. 


1.22 WELDING AND CUTTING 

 As specified in section 1.14, Hot Work: Perform and safeguard hot work 
operations in accordance with NFPA 241 and NFPA 51B. Coordinate with 
Project Manager and/or Facility Safety Manager and/or other Government 
Designated Authority. Obtain permits from Project Manager and/or 
Facility Safety Manager and/or other Government Designated Authority at 
least 24 hours in advance . Designate contractor's responsible projectsite 
fire prevention program manager to permit hot work. 

1.23 LADDERS 

A. All Ladder use shall comply with 29 CFR 1926 Subpart X. 

B. All portable ladders shall be of sufficient length and shall be placed 
so that workers will not stretch or assume a hazardous position. 

C. Manufacturer safety labels shall be in place on ladders 

D. Step Ladders shall not be used in the closed position 

E. Top steps or cap of step ladders shall not be used as a step 

F. Portable ladders, used as temporary access, shall extend at least 3 ft 
(0.9 m) above the upper landing surface. 






1. When a 3 ft (0.9-m) extension is not possible, a grasping device 
(such as a grab rail) shall be provided to assist workers in 
mounting and dismounting the ladder. 

2. In no case shall the length of the ladder be such that ladder 
deflection under a load would, by itself, cause the ladder to slip 
from its support. 

G. Ladders shall be inspected for visible defects on a daily basis and 
after any occurrence that could affect their safe use. Broken or 
damaged ladders shall be immediately tagged "DO NOT USE," or with 
similar wording, and withdrawn from service until restored to a 
condition meeting their original design. 

1.24 FLOOR & WALL OPENINGS 

A. All floor and wall openings shall comply with 29 CFR 1926 Subpart M. 

B. Floor and roof holes/openings are any that measure over 2 in (51 mm) in 
any direction of a walking/working surface which persons may trip or 


fall into or where objects may fall to the level below. See 21.F for 
covering and labeling requirements. Skylights located in floors or 
roofs are considered floor or roof hole/openings. 

C. All floor, roof openings or hole into which a person can accidentally 
walk or fall through shall be guarded either by a railing system with 
toeboards along all exposed sides or a load-bearing cover. When the 
cover is not in place, the opening or hole shall be protected by a 
removable guardrail system or shall be attended when the guarding 
system has been removed, or other fall protection system. 

1. Covers shall be capable of supporting, without failure, at least 
twice the weight of the worker, equipment and material combined. 

2. Covers shall be secured when installed, clearly marked with the word 
“HOLE”, “COVER” or “Danger, Roof Opening-Do Not Remove” or colorcoded 
or equivalent methods (e.g., red or orange “X”). Workers must 
be made aware of the meaning for color coding and equivalent 
methods. 

3. Roofing material, such as roofing membrane, insulation or felts, 
covering or partly covering openings or holes, shall be immediately 
cut out. No hole or opening shall be left unattended unless covered. 

4. Non-load-bearing skylights shall be guarded by a load-bearing 
skylight screen, cover, or railing system along all exposed sides. 

5. Workers are prohibited from standing/walking on skylights. 

- - - E N D - - - 

 


SECTION 01 42 19 
REFERENCE STANDARDS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies the availability and source of references and 
standards specified in the project manual under paragraphs APPLICABLE 
PUBLICATIONS and/or shown on the drawings. 

1.2 AVAILABILITY OF SPECIFICATIONS LISTED IN THE GSA INDEX OF FEDERAL 
SPECIFICATIONS, STANDARDS AND COMMERCIAL ITEM DESCRIPTIONS FPMR PART 101-29 
(FAR 52.211-1) (AUG 1998) 

A. The GSA Index of Federal Specifications, Standards and Commercial Item 
Descriptions, FPMR Part 101-29 and copies of specifications, standards, 
and commercial item descriptions cited in the solicitation may be 
obtained for a fee by submitting a request to – GSA Federal Supply 
Service, Specifications Section, Suite 8100, 470 East L’Enfant Plaza, 
SW, Washington, DC 20407, Telephone (202) 619-8925, Facsimile (202) 619- 
8978. 

B. If the General Services Administration, Department of Agriculture, or 
Department of Veterans Affairs issued this solicitation, a single copy 
of specifications, standards, and commercial item descriptions cited in 
this solicitation may be obtained free of charge by submitting a request 
to the addressee in paragraph (a) of this provision. Additional copies 
will be issued for a fee. 

1.3 AVAILABILITY FOR EXAMINATION OF SPECIFICATIONS NOT LISTED IN THE GSA INDEX 
OF FEDERAL SPECIFICATIONS, STANDARDS AND COMMERCIAL ITEM DESCRIPTIONS 
(FAR 52.211-4) (JUN 1988) 

 The specifications and standards cited in this solicitation can be 
examined at the following location: 

 DEPARMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS 
Office of Construction & Facilities Management 
Facilities Quality Service (00CFM1A) 
425 Eye Street N.W, (sixth floor) 
Washington, DC 20001 
Telephone Numbers: (202) 632-5249 or (202) 632-5178 
Between 9:00 AM - 3:00 PM 

1.4 AVAILABILITY OF SPECIFICATIONS NOT LISTED IN THE GSA INDEX OF FEDERAL 
SPECIFICATIONS, STANDARDS AND COMMERCIAL ITEM DESCRIPTIONS (FAR 52.211-3) 
(JUN 1988) 

 The specifications cited in this solicitation may be obtained from the 
associations or organizations listed below. 

 AA Aluminum Association Inc. 
http://www.aluminum.org 


AABC Associated Air Balance Council 
http://www.aabchq.com 

AAMA American Architectural Manufacturer's Association 
http://www.aamanet.org 

AAN American Nursery and Landscape Association 
http://www.anla.org 

AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
http://www.aashto.org 

AATCC American Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists 
http://www.aatcc.org 

ACGIH American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists 
http://www.acgih.org 

ACI American Concrete Institute 
http://www.aci-int.net 

ACPA American Concrete Pipe Association 
http://www.concrete-pipe.org 

ACPPA American Concrete Pressure Pipe Association 
http://www.acppa.org 

ADC Air Diffusion Council 
http://flexibleduct.org 

AGA American Gas Association 
http://www.aga.org 

AGC Associated General Contractors of America 
http://www.agc.org 

AGMA American Gear Manufacturers Association, Inc. 
http://www.agma.org 

AHAM Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers 
http://www.aham.org 

AISC American Institute of Steel Construction 
http://www.aisc.org 

AISI American Iron and Steel Institute 
http://www.steel.org 

AITC American Institute of Timber Construction 
http://www.aitc-glulam.org 

AMCA Air Movement and Control Association, Inc. 
http://www.amca.org 

ANLA American Nursery & Landscape Association 
http://www.anla.org 

ANSI American National Standards Institute, Inc. 
http://www.ansi.org 


APA The Engineered Wood Association 
http://www.apawood.org 

ARI Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute 
http://www.ari.org 

ASAE American Society of Agricultural Engineers 
http://www.asae.org 

ASCE American Society of Civil Engineers 
http://www.asce.org 

ASHRAE American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and 
Air-Conditioning Engineers 
http://www.ashrae.org 

ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
http://www.asme.org 

ASSE American Society of Sanitary Engineering 
http://www.asse-plumbing.org 

ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials 
http://www.astm.org 

AWI Architectural Woodwork Institute 
http://www.awinet.org 

AWS American Welding Society 
http://www.aws.org 

AWWA American Water Works Association 
http://www.awwa.org 

BHMA Builders Hardware Manufacturers Association 
http://www.buildershardware.com 

BIA Brick Institute of America 
http://www.bia.org 

CAGI Compressed Air and Gas Institute 
http://www.cagi.org 

CGA Compressed Gas Association, Inc. 
http://www.cganet.com 

CI The Chlorine Institute, Inc. 
http://www.chlorineinstitute.org 

CISCA Ceilings and Interior Systems Construction Association 
http://www.cisca.org 

CISPI Cast Iron Soil Pipe Institute 
http://www.cispi.org 

CLFMI Chain Link Fence Manufacturers Institute 
http://www.chainlinkinfo.org 

CPMB Concrete Plant Manufacturers Bureau 
http://www.cpmb.org 


CRA California Redwood Association 
http://www.calredwood.org 

CRSI Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute 
http://www.crsi.org 

CTI Cooling Technology Institute 
http://www.cti.org 

DHI Door and Hardware Institute 
http://www.dhi.org 

EGSA Electrical Generating Systems Association 
http://www.egsa.org 

EEI Edison Electric Institute 
http://www.eei.org 

EPA Environmental Protection Agency 
http://www.epa.gov 

ETL ETL Testing Laboratories, Inc. 
http://www.et1.com 

FAA Federal Aviation Administration 
http://www.faa.gov 

FCC Federal Communications Commission 
http://www.fcc.gov 

FPS The Forest Products Society 
http://www.forestprod.org 

GANA Glass Association of North America 
http://www.cssinfo.com/info/gana.html/ 

FM Factory Mutual Insurance 
http://www.fmglobal.com 

GA Gypsum Association 
http://www.gypsum.org 

GSA General Services Administration 
http://www.gsa.gov 

HI Hydraulic Institute 
http://www.pumps.org 

HPVA Hardwood Plywood & Veneer Association 
http://www.hpva.org 

ICBO International Conference of Building Officials 
http://www.icbo.org 

ICEA Insulated Cable Engineers Association Inc. 
http://www.icea.net 

\ICAC Institute of Clean Air Companies 
http://www.icac.com 


IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
http://www.ieee.org\ 

IMSA International Municipal Signal Association 
http://www.imsasafety.org 

IPCEA Insulated Power Cable Engineers Association 

NBMA Metal Buildings Manufacturers Association 
http://www.mbma.com 

MSS Manufacturers Standardization Society of the Valve and Fittings 
Industry Inc. 
http://www.mss-hq.com 

NAAMM National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers 
http://www.naamm.org 

NAPHCC Plumbing-Heating-Cooling Contractors Association 
http://www.phccweb.org.org 

NBS National Bureau of Standards 
See - NIST 

NBBPVI National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors 
http://www.nationboard.org 

NEC National Electric Code 
See - NFPA National Fire Protection Association 

NEMA National Electrical Manufacturers Association 
http://www.nema.org 

NFPA National Fire Protection Association 
http://www.nfpa.org 

NHLA National Hardwood Lumber Association 
http://www.natlhardwood.org 

NIH National Institute of Health 
http://www.nih.gov 

NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology 
http://www.nist.gov 

NLMA Northeastern Lumber Manufacturers Association, Inc. 
http://www.nelma.org 

NPA National Particleboard Association 
18928 Premiere Court 
Gaithersburg, MD 20879 
(301) 670-0604 

NSF National Sanitation Foundation 
http://www.nsf.org 

NWWDA Window and Door Manufacturers Association 
http://www.nwwda.org 


OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
Department of Labor 
http://www.osha.gov 

PCA Portland Cement Association 
http://www.portcement.org 

PCI Precast Prestressed Concrete Institute 
http://www.pci.org 

PPI The Plastic Pipe Institute 
http://www.plasticpipe.org 

PEI Porcelain Enamel Institute, Inc. 
http://www.porcelainenamel.com 

PTI Post-Tensioning Institute 
http://www.post-tensioning.org 

RFCI The Resilient Floor Covering Institute 
http://www.rfci.com 

RIS Redwood Inspection Service 
See - CRA 

RMA Rubber Manufacturers Association, Inc. 
http://www.rma.org 

SCMA Southern Cypress Manufacturers Association 
http://www.cypressinfo.org 

SDI Steel Door Institute 
http://www.steeldoor.org 

IGMA Insulating Glass Manufacturers Alliance 
http://www.igmaonline.org 

SJI Steel Joist Institute 
http://www.steeljoist.org 

SMACNA Sheet Metal and Air-Conditioning Contractors 
National Association, Inc. 
http://www.smacna.org 

SSPC The Society for Protective Coatings 
http://www.sspc.org 

STI Steel Tank Institute 
http://www.steeltank.com 

SWI Steel Window Institute 
http://www.steelwindows.com 

TCA Tile Council of America, Inc. 
http://www.tileusa.com 

TEMA Tubular Exchange Manufacturers Association 
http://www.tema.org 


TPI Truss Plate Institute, Inc. 
583 D'Onofrio Drive; Suite 200 
Madison, WI 53719 
(608) 833-5900 

UBC The Uniform Building Code 
See ICBO 

UL Underwriters' Laboratories Incorporated 
http://www.ul.com 

ULC Underwriters' Laboratories of Canada 
http://www.ulc.ca 

WCLIB West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau 
6980 SW Varns Road, P.O. Box 23145 
Portland, OR 97223 
(503) 639-0651 

WRCLA Western Red Cedar Lumber Association 
P.O. Box 120786 
New Brighton, MN 55112 
(612) 633-4334 

WWPA Western Wood Products Association 
http://www.wwpa.org 

- - - E N D - - - 


 SECTION 01 57 19 
TEMPORARY ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies the control of environmental pollution and damage 
that the Contractor must consider for air, water, and land resources. It 
includes management of visual aesthetics, noise, solid waste, radiant 
energy, and radioactive materials, as well as other pollutants and 
resources encountered or generated by the Contractor. The Contractor is 
obligated to consider specified control measures with the costs included 
within the various contract items of work. 

B. Environmental pollution and damage is defined as the presence of 
chemical, physical, or biological elements or agents which: 

1. Adversely effect human health or welfare, 

2. Unfavorably alter ecological balances of importance to human life, 

3. Effect other species of importance to humankind, or; 

4. Degrade the utility of the environment for aesthetic, cultural, and 
historical purposes. 

C. Definitions of Pollutants: 

1. Chemical Waste: Petroleum products, bituminous materials, salts, 
acids, alkalis, herbicides, pesticides, organic chemicals, and 
inorganic wastes. 

2. Debris: Combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as leaves, tree 
trimmings, ashes, and waste materials resulting from construction or 
maintenance and repair work. 

3. Sediment: Soil and other debris that has been eroded and transported 
by runoff water. 

4. Solid Waste: Rubbish, debris, garbage, and other discarded solid 
materials, resulting from industrial, commercial, and agricultural 
operations and from community activities. 

5. Surface Discharge: The term "Surface Discharge" implies that the 
water is discharged with possible sheeting action and subsequent soil 
erosion may occur. Waters that are surface discharged may terminate 
in drainage ditches, storm sewers, creeks, and/or "water of the 
United States" and would require a permit to discharge water from the 
governing agency. 

6. Rubbish: Combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, boxes, 
glass and crockery, metal and lumber scrap, tin cans, and bones. 


7. Sanitary Wastes: 

a. Sewage: Domestic sanitary sewage and human and animal waste. 

b. Garbage: Refuse and scraps resulting from preparation, cooking, 
dispensing, and consumption of food. 

1.2 QUALITY CONTROL 

A. Establish and maintain quality control for the environmental protection 
of all items set forth herein. 

B. Record on daily reports any problems in complying with laws, 
regulations, and ordinances. Note any corrective action taken. 

1.3 REFERENCES 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referred to in the text by basic 
designation only. 

B. U.S. National Archives and Records Administration (NARA): 

33 CFR 328..............Definitions 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. In accordance with Section, 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND 
SAMPLES, furnish the following: 

1. Environmental Protection Plan: After the contract is awarded and 
prior to the commencement of the work, the Contractor shall meet with 
the Resident Engineer to discuss the proposed Environmental 
Protection Plan and to develop mutual understanding relative to 
details of environmental protection. Not more than 20 days after the 
meeting, the Contractor shall prepare and submit to the Resident 
Engineer and the Contracting Officer for approval, a written and/or 
graphic Environmental Protection Plan including, but not limited to, 
the following: 

a. Name(s) of person(s) within the Contractor's organization who is 
(are) responsible for ensuring adherence to the Environmental 
Protection Plan. 

b. Name(s) and qualifications of person(s) responsible for 
manifesting hazardous waste to be removed from the site. 

c. Name(s) and qualifications of person(s) responsible for training 
the Contractor's environmental protection personnel. 

d. Description of the Contractor's environmental protection personnel 
training program. 

e. A list of Federal, State, and local laws, regulations, and permits 
concerning environmental protection, pollution control, noise 
control and abatement that are applicable to the Contractor's 
proposed operations and the requirements imposed by those laws, 
regulations, and permits. 


f. Methods for protection of features to be preserved within 
authorized work areas including trees, shrubs, vines, grasses, 
ground cover, landscape features, air and water quality, fish and 
wildlife, soil, historical, and archeological and cultural 
resources. 

g. Procedures to provide the environmental protection that comply 
with the applicable laws and regulations. Describe the procedures 
to correct pollution of the environment due to accident, natural 
causes, or failure to follow the procedures as described in the 
Environmental Protection Plan. 

h. Permits, licenses, and the location of the solid waste disposal 
area. 

i. Drawings showing locations of any proposed temporary excavations 
or embankments for haul roads, stream crossings, material storage 
areas, structures, sanitary facilities, and stockpiles of excess 
or spoil materials. Include as part of an Erosion Control Plan 
approved by the District Office of the U.S. Soil Conservation 
Service and the Department of Veterans Affairs. 

j. Environmental Monitoring Plans for the job site including land, 
water, air, and noise. 

k. Work Area Plan showing the proposed activity in each portion of 
the area and identifying the areas of limited use or nonuse. Plan 
should include measures for marking the limits of use areas. This 
plan may be incorporated within the Erosion Control Plan. 

B. Approval of the Contractor's Environmental Protection Plan will not 
relieve the Contractor of responsibility for adequate and continued 
control of pollutants and other environmental protection measures. 

1.5 PROTECTION OF ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES 

A. Protect environmental resources within the project boundaries and those 
affected outside the limits of permanent work during the entire period 
of this contract. Confine activities to areas defined by the 
specifications and drawings. 

B. Protection of Land Resources: Prior to construction, identify all land 
resources to be preserved within the work area. Do not remove, cut, 
deface, injure, or destroy land resources including trees, shrubs, 
vines, grasses, top soil, and land forms without permission from the 
Resident Engineer. Do not fasten or attach ropes, cables, or guys to 
trees for anchorage unless specifically authorized, or where special 
emergency use is permitted. 

1. Work Area Limits: Prior to any construction, mark the areas that 
require work to be performed under this contract. Mark or fence 


isolated areas within the general work area that are to be saved and 
protected. Protect monuments, works of art, and markers before 
construction operations begin. Convey to all personnel the purpose of 
marking and protecting all necessary objects. 

2. Protection of Landscape: Protect trees, shrubs, vines, grasses, land 
forms, and other landscape features shown on the drawings to be 
preserved by marking, fencing, or using any other approved 
techniques. 

a. Box and protect from damage existing trees and shrubs to remain on 
the construction site. 

b. Immediately repair all damage to existing trees and shrubs by 
trimming, cleaning, and painting with antiseptic tree paint. 

c. Do not store building materials or perform construction activities 
closer to existing trees or shrubs than the farthest extension of 
their limbs. 

3. Reduction of Exposure of Unprotected Erodible Soils: Plan and conduct 
earthwork to minimize the duration of exposure of unprotected soils. 
Clear areas in reasonably sized increments only as needed to use. 
Form earthwork to final grade as shown. Immediately protect side 
slopes and back slopes upon completion of rough grading. 

4. Temporary Protection of Disturbed Areas: Construct diversion ditches, 
benches, and berms to retard and divert runoff from the construction 
site to protected drainage areas approved under paragraph 208 of the 
Clean Water Act. 

 

a. Sediment Basins: Trap sediment from construction areas in 
temporary or permanent sediment basins that accommodate the runoff 
of a local 2 (design year) storm. After each storm, pump the 
basins dry and remove the accumulated sediment. Control 
overflow/drainage with paved weirs or by vertical overflow pipes, 
draining from the surface. 

b. Reuse or conserve the collected topsoil sediment as directed by 
the Resident Engineer. Topsoil use and requirements are specified 
in Section 31 20 00, EARTH MOVING. 

c. Institute effluent quality monitoring programs as required by 
Federal, State, and local environmental agencies. 

5. Erosion and Sedimentation Control Devices: The erosion and sediment 
controls selected and maintained by the Contractor shall be such that 
water quality standards are not violated as a result of the 
Contractor's activities. Construct or install all temporary and 
permanent erosion and sedimentation control features on the 


Environmental Protection Plan. Maintain temporary erosion and 
sediment control measures such as berms, dikes, drains, sedimentation 
basins, grassing, and mulching, until permanent drainage and erosion 
control facilities are completed and operative. 

6. Manage borrow areas on and off Government property to minimize 
erosion and to prevent sediment from entering nearby water courses or 
lakes. 

7. Manage and control spoil areas on and off Government property to 
limit spoil to areas on the Environmental Protection Plan and prevent 
erosion of soil or sediment from entering nearby water courses or 
lakes. 

8. Protect adjacent areas from despoilment by temporary excavations and 
embankments. 

9. Handle and dispose of solid wastes in such a manner that will prevent 
contamination of the environment. Place solid wastes (excluding 
clearing debris) in containers that are emptied on a regular 
schedule. Transport all solid waste off Government property and 
dispose of waste in compliance with Federal, State, and local 
requirements. 

10. Store chemical waste away from the work areas in corrosion resistant 
containers and dispose of waste in accordance with Federal, State, 
and local regulations. 

11. Handle discarded materials other than those included in the solid 
waste category as directed by the Resident Engineer. 

C. Protection of Water Resources: Keep construction activities under 
surveillance, management, and control to avoid pollution of surface and 
ground waters and sewer systems. Implement management techniques to 
control water pollution by the listed construction activities that are 
included in this contract. 

1. Washing and Curing Water: Do not allow wastewater directly derived 
from construction activities to enter water areas. Collect and place 
wastewater in retention ponds allowing the suspended material to 
settle, the pollutants to separate, or the water to evaporate. 

2. Control movement of materials and equipment at stream crossings 
during construction to prevent violation of water pollution control 
standards of the Federal, State, or local government. 

 

3. Monitor water areas affected by construction. 

D. Protection of Fish and Wildlife Resources: Keep construction activities 
under surveillance, management, and control to minimize interference 
with, disturbance of, or damage to fish and wildlife. 


E. Protection of Air Resources: Keep construction activities under 
surveillance, management, and control to minimize pollution of air 
resources. Burning is not permitted on the job site. Keep activities, 
equipment, processes, and work operated or performed, in strict 
accordance with the State of Arkansas Department of Environmental 
Quality and Federal emission and performance laws and standards. 
Maintain ambient air quality standards set by the Environmental 
Protection Agency, for those construction operations and activities 
specified. 

1. Particulates: Control dust particles, aerosols, and gaseous byproducts 
from all construction activities, processing, and 
preparation of materials (such as from asphaltic batch plants) at all 
times, including weekends, holidays, and hours when work is not in 
progress. 

2. Particulates Control: Maintain all excavations, stockpiles, haul 
roads, permanent and temporary access roads, plant sites, spoil 
areas, borrow areas, and all other work areas within or outside the 
project boundaries free from particulates which would cause a hazard 
or a nuisance. Sprinklering, chemical treatment of an approved type, 
light bituminous treatment, baghouse, scrubbers, electrostatic 
precipitators, or other methods are permitted to control particulates 
in the work area. 

3. Hydrocarbons and Carbon Monoxide: Control monoxide emissions from 
equipment to Federal and State allowable limits. 

4. Odors: Control odors of construction activities and prevent obnoxious 
odors from occurring. 

F. Reduction of Noise: Minimize noise using every action possible. Perform 
noise-producing work in less sensitive hours of the day or week as 
directed by the Resident Engineer. Maintain noise-produced work at or 
below the decibel levels and within the time periods specified. 

1. Perform construction activities involving repetitive, high-level 
impact noise only between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m unless otherwise 
permitted by the Resident Engineer. Repetitive impact noise on the 
property shall not exceed the following dB limitations: 

Time Duration of Impact Noise 

Sound Level in dB 

More than 12 minutes in any hour 

70 

Less than 30 seconds of any hour 

85 

Less than three minutes of any hour 

80 

Less than 12 minutes of any hour 

75 



 


2. Provide sound-deadening devices on equipment and take noise abatement 
measures that are necessary to comply with the requirements of this 
contract, consisting of, but not limited to, the following: 

a. Maintain maximum permissible construction equipment noise levels 
at 15 m (50 feet) (dBA): 

EARTHMOVING 

MATERIALS HANDLING 

FRONT LOADERS 

75 

CONCRETE MIXERS 

75 

BACKHOES 

75 

CONCRETE PUMPS 

75 

DOZERS 

75 

CRANES 

75 

TRACTORS 

75 

DERRICKS IMPACT 

75 

SCAPERS 

80 

PILE DRIVERS 

95 

GRADERS 

75 

JACK HAMMERS 

75 

TRUCKS 

75 

ROCK DRILLS 

80 

PAVERS, 
STATIONARY 

80 

PNEUMATIC TOOLS 

80 

PUMPS 

75 

 

 

GENERATORS 

75 

SAWS 

75 

COMPRESSORS 

75 

VIBRATORS 

75 



 

b. Use shields or other physical barriers to restrict noise 
transmission. 

c. Provide soundproof housings or enclosures for noise-producing 
machinery. 

d. Use efficient silencers on equipment air intakes. 

e. Use efficient intake and exhaust mufflers on internal combustion 
engines that are maintained so equipment performs below noise 
levels specified. 

f. Line hoppers and storage bins with sound deadening material. 

g. Conduct truck loading, unloading, and hauling operations so that 
noise is kept to a minimum. 

3. Measure sound level for noise exposure due to the construction at 
least once every five successive working days while work is being 
performed above 55 dB(A) noise level. Measure noise exposure at the 
property line or 15 m (50 feet) from the noise source, whichever is 
greater. Measure the sound levels on the A weighing network of a 
General Purpose sound level meter at slow response. To minimize the 
effect of reflective sound waves at buildings, take measurements at 
900 to 1800 mm (three to six feet) in front of any building face. 
Submit the recorded information to the Resident Engineer noting any 
problems and the alternatives for mitigating actions. 


G. Restoration of Damaged Property: If any direct or indirect damage is 
done to public or private property resulting from any act, omission, 
neglect, or misconduct, the Contractor shall restore the damaged 
property to a condition equal to that existing before the damage at no 
additional cost to the Government. Repair, rebuild, or restore property 
as directed or make good such damage in an acceptable manner. 

H. Final Clean-up: On completion of project and after removal of all 
debris, rubbish, and temporary construction, Contractor shall leave the 
construction area in a clean condition satisfactory to the Resident 
Engineer. Cleaning shall include off the station disposal of all items 
and materials not required to be salvaged, as well as all debris and 
rubbish resulting from demolition and new work operations. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 01 58 16 
TEMPORARY INTERIOR SIGNAGE 

PART 1 GENERAL 

DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies temporary interior signs. 

PART 2 PRODUCTS 

2.1 TEMPORARY SIGNS 

A. Fabricate from 50 Kg (110 pound) mat finish white paper. 

B. Cut to 100 mm (4-inch) wide by 300 mm (12 inch) long size tag. 

C. Punch 3 mm (1/8-inch) diameter hole centered on 100 mm (4-inch) 
dimension of tag. Edge of Hole spaced approximately 13 mm (1/2-inch) 
from one end on tag. 

D. Reinforce hole on both sides with gummed cloth washer or other suitable 
material capable of preventing tie pulling through paper edge. 

E. Ties: Steel wire 0.3 mm (0.0120-inch) thick, attach to tag with twist 
tie, leaving 150 mm (6-inch) long free ends. 

PART 3 EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Install temporary signs attached to room door frame or room door knob, 
lever, or pull for doors on corridor openings. 

B. Mark on signs with felt tip marker having approximately 3 mm (1/8-inch) 
wide stroke for clearly legible numbers or letters. 

C. Identify room with numbers as designated on floor plans. 

3.2 LOCATION 

A. Install on doors that have room, corridor, and space numbers shown. 

B. Doors that do not require signs are as follows: 

1. Corridor barrier doors (cross-corridor) in corridor with same number. 

2. Folding doors or partitions. 

3. Toilet or bathroom doors within and between rooms. 

4. Communicating doors in partitions between rooms with corridor 
entrance doors. 

5. Closet doors within rooms. 

C. Replace missing, damaged, or illegible signs. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 01 74 19 
CONSTRUCTION WASTE MANAGEMENT 

PART 1 – GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies the requirements for the management of nonhazardous 
building construction and demolition waste. 

B. Waste disposal in landfills shall be minimized to the greatest extent 
possible. Of the inevitable waste that is generated, as much of the 
waste material as economically feasible shall be salvaged, recycled or 
reused. 

C. Contractor shall use all reasonable means to divert construction and 
demolition waste from landfills and incinerators, and facilitate their 
salvage and recycle not limited to the following: 

1. Waste Management Plan development and implementation. 

2. Techniques to minimize waste generation. 

3. Sorting and separating of waste materials. 

4. Salvage of existing materials and items for reuse or resale. 

5. Recycling of materials that cannot be reused or sold. 

D. At a minimum the following waste categories shall be diverted from 
landfills: 

1. Soil. 

2. Inerts (eg, concrete, masonry and asphalt). 

3. Clean dimensional wood and palette wood. 

4. Green waste (biodegradable landscaping materials). 

5. Engineered wood products (plywood, particle board and I-joists, 
etc). 

6. Metal products (eg, steel, wire, beverage containers, copper, etc). 

7. Cardboard, paper and packaging. 

8. Bitumen roofing materials. 

9. Plastics (eg, ABS, PVC). 

10. Carpet and/or pad. 

11. Gypsum board. 

12. Insulation. 

13. Paint. 

14. Fluorescent lamps. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 02 41 00, DEMOLITION. 

B. Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 


1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Contractor shall practice efficient waste management when sizing, 
cutting and installing building products. Processes shall be employed 
to ensure the generation of as little waste as possible. Construction 
/Demolition waste includes products of the following: 

1. Excess or unusable construction materials. 

2. Packaging used for construction products. 

3. Poor planning and/or layout. 

4. Construction error. 

5. Over ordering. 

6. Weather damage. 

7. Contamination. 

8. Mishandling. 

9. Breakage. 

B. Establish and maintain the management of non-hazardous building 
construction and demolition waste set forth herein. Conduct a site 
assessment to estimate the types of materials that will be generated by 
demolition and construction. 

C. Contractor shall develop and implement procedures to recycle 
construction and demolition waste to a minimum of 50 percent. 

D. Contractor shall be responsible for implementation of any special 
programs involving rebates or similar incentives related to recycling. 
Any revenues or savings obtained from salvage or recycling shall accrue 
to the contractor. 

E. Contractor shall provide all demolition, removal and legal disposal of 
materials. Contractor shall ensure that facilities used for recycling, 
reuse and disposal shall be permitted for the intended use to the 
extent required by local, state, federal regulations. The Whole 
Building Design Guide website http://www.wbdg.org/tools/cwm.php 
provides a Construction Waste Management Database that contains 
information on companies that haul, collect, and process recyclable 
debris from construction projects. 

F. Contractor shall assign a specific area to facilitate separation of 
materials for reuse, salvage, recycling, and return. Such areas are to 
be kept neat and clean and clearly marked in order to avoid 
contamination or mixing of materials. 


G. Contractor shall provide on-site instructions and supervision of 
separation, handling, salvaging, recycling, reuse and return methods to 
be used by all parties during waste generating stages. 

H. Record on daily reports any problems in complying with laws, 
regulations and ordinances with corrective action taken. 

1.4 TERMINOLOGY 

A. Class III Landfill: A landfill that accepts non-hazardous resources 
such as household, commercial and industrial waste resulting from 
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations. 

B. Clean: Untreated and unpainted; uncontaminated with adhesives, oils, 
solvents, mastics and like products. 

C. Construction and Demolition Waste: Includes all non-hazardous resources 
resulting from construction, remodeling, alterations, repair and 
demolition operations. 

D. Dismantle: The process of parting out a building in such a way as to 
preserve the usefulness of its materials and components. 

E. Disposal: Acceptance of solid wastes at a legally operating facility 
for the purpose of land filling (includes Class III landfills and inert 
fills). 

F. Inert Backfill Site: A location, other than inert fill or other 
disposal facility, to which inert materials are taken for the purpose 
of filling an excavation, shoring or other soil engineering operation. 

G. Inert Fill: A facility that can legally accept inert waste, such as 
asphalt and concrete exclusively for the purpose of disposal. 

H. Inert Solids/Inert Waste: Non-liquid solid resources including, but not 
limited to, soil and concrete that does not contain hazardous waste or 
soluble pollutants at concentrations in excess of water-quality 
objectives established by a regional water board, and does not contain 
significant quantities of decomposable solid resources. 

I. Mixed Debris: Loads that include commingled recyclable and nonrecyclable 
materials generated at the construction site. 

J. Mixed Debris Recycling Facility: A solid resource processing facility 
that accepts loads of mixed construction and demolition debris for the 
purpose of recovering re-usable and recyclable materials and disposing 
non-recyclable materials. 

K. Permitted Waste Hauler: A company that holds a valid permit to collect 
and transport solid wastes from individuals or businesses for the 
purpose of recycling or disposal. 


L. Recycling: The process of sorting, cleansing, treating, and 
reconstituting materials for the purpose of using the altered form in 
the manufacture of a new product. Recycling does not include burning, 
incinerating or thermally destroying solid waste. 

1. On-site Recycling – Materials that are sorted and processed on site 
for use in an altered state in the work, i.e. concrete crushed for 
use as a sub-base in paving. 

2. Off-site Recycling – Materials hauled to a location and used in an 
altered form in the manufacture of new products. 

M. Recycling Facility: An operation that can legally accept materials for 
the purpose of processing the materials into an altered form for the 
manufacture of new products. Depending on the types of materials 
accepted and operating procedures, a recycling facility may or may not 
be required to have a solid waste facilities permit or be regulated by 
the local enforcement agency. 

N. Reuse: Materials that are recovered for use in the same form, on-site 
or off-site. 

O. Return: To give back reusable items or unused products to vendors for 
credit. 

P. Salvage: To remove waste materials from the site for resale or re-use 
by a third party. 

Q. Source-Separated Materials: Materials that are sorted by type at the 
site for the purpose of reuse and recycling. 

R. Solid Waste: Materials that have been designated as non-recyclable and 
are discarded for the purposes of disposal. 

S. Transfer Station: A facility that can legally accept solid waste for 
the purpose of temporarily storing the materials for re-loading onto 
other trucks and transporting them to a landfill for disposal, or 
recovering some materials for re-use or recycling. 

1.5 SUBMITTALS 

A. In accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, and 
SAMPLES, furnish the following: 

B. Prepare and submit to the Resident Engineer a written demolition debris 
management plan. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the 
following information: 

1. Procedures to be used for debris management. 

2. Techniques to be used to minimize waste generation. 

3. Analysis of the estimated job site waste to be generated: 


a. List of each material and quantity to be salvaged, reused, 
recycled. 

b. List of each material and quantity proposed to be taken to a 
landfill. 

4. Detailed description of the Means/Methods to be used for material 
handling. 

a. On site: Material separation, storage, protection where 
applicable. 

b. Off site: Transportation means and destination. Include list of 
materials. 

1) Description of materials to be site-separated and self-hauled 
to designated facilities. 

2) Description of mixed materials to be collected by designated 
waste haulers and removed from the site. 

c. The names and locations of mixed debris reuse and recycling 
facilities or sites. 

d. The names and locations of trash disposal landfill facilities or 
sites. 

e. Documentation that the facilities or sites are approved to 
receive the materials. 

C. Designated Manager responsible for instructing personnel, supervising, 
documenting and administer over meetings relevant to the Waste 
Management Plan. 

D. Monthly summary of construction and demolition debris diversion and 
disposal, quantifying all materials generated at the work site and 
disposed of or diverted from disposal through recycling. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A Publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced by the basic designation 
only. In the event that criteria requirements conflict, the most 
stringent requirements shall be met. 

B. U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC): 

LEED Green Building Rating System for New Construction 

1.7 RECORDS 

 Maintain records to document the quantity of waste generated; the 
quantity of waste diverted through sale, reuse, or recycling; and the 
quantity of waste disposed by landfill or incineration. Records shall 
be kept in accordance with the LEED Reference Guide and LEED Template. 


PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. List of each material and quantity to be salvaged, recycled, reused. 

B. List of each material and quantity proposed to be taken to a landfill. 

C. Material tracking data: Receiving parties, dates removed, 
transportation costs, weight tickets, tipping fees, manifests, 
invoices, net total costs or savings. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 COLLECTION 

A. Provide all necessary containers, bins and storage areas to facilitate 
effective waste management. 

B. Clearly identify containers, bins and storage areas so that recyclable 
materials are separated from trash and can be transported to respective 
recycling facility for processing. 

C. Hazardous wastes shall be separated, stored, disposed of according to 
local, state, federal regulations. 

3.2 DISPOSAL 

A. Contractor shall be responsible for transporting and disposing of 
materials that cannot be delivered to a source-separated or mixed 
materials recycling facility to a transfer station or disposal facility 
that can accept the materials in accordance with state and federal 
regulations. 

B. Construction or demolition materials with no practical reuse or that 
cannot be salvaged or recycled shall be disposed of at a landfill or 
incinerator. 

3.3 REPORT 

A. With each application for progress payment, submit a summary of 
construction and demolition debris diversion and disposal including 
beginning and ending dates of period covered. 

B. Quantify all materials diverted from landfill disposal through salvage 
or recycling during the period with the receiving parties, dates 
removed, transportation costs, weight tickets, manifests, invoices. 
Include the net total costs or savings for each salvaged or recycled 
material. 

C. Quantify all materials disposed of during the period with the receiving 
parties, dates removed, transportation costs, weight tickets, tipping 
fees, manifests, and invoices. Include the net total costs for each 
disposal. 


- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 01 77 01 

FINAL CLEANING 

PART 1. GENERAL: 

 

1.1 SUMMARY 




 

This section includes administrative and procedural requirements for 
final cleaning. 

 

1.2 ACTION SUBMITTALS 

 

Product Data: For cleaning agents. 

 

PART 2 – PRODUCTS 

 

2.1 MATERIALS 




 

A. Cleaning Agents: use cleaning materials and agents recommended 
by manufacturer or fabricator of the surface to be cleaned. Do 
not use cleaning agents that are potentially hazardous to health 
or property or that might damage finished surfaces. 


 

PART 3 – EXECUTION 

 

3.1 FINAL CLEANING 

 

A. General: Perform final cleaning. Conduct cleaning and wasteremoval 
operations to comply with local laws and ordinances and 
Federal and local environmental and antipollution regulations. 
B. Cleaning: Employ experienced workers or professional cleaners 
for final cleaning. Clean each surface or unit to condition 
expected in an average commercial building cleaning and 
maintenance program. Comply with manufacturer’s written 
instructions. 
1. Complete the following cleaning operations before requesting 
inspection for certification of Substantial Completion for 
entire Project or for a designated portion of Project: 
a. Clean project site, yard, and grounds, in areas disturbed 
by construction activities, including landscape 
development areas, of rubbish, waste material, litter, and 
other foreign substances. 
b. Sweep paved areas broom clean. Remove petrochemical 
spills, stains, and other foreign deposits. 
c. Rake grounds that are neither planted nor paved to be 
smooth, even-textured surface. 
d. Remove tools, construction equipment, machinery, and 
surplus material from Project site. 
e. Remove snow and ice to provide safe access to building. 
f. Clean exposed exterior and interior hard-surfaced finishes 
to a dirt-free condition, free of stains, films, and 
similar foreign substances. Avoid disturbing natural 
weathering of exterior surfaces. Restore reflective 
surfaces to their original condition. 
g. Remove debris and surface dust from limited access spaces, 
including roofs, plenums, shafts, trenches, equipment 
vaults, manholes, attics, and similar spaces. 
h. Sweep concrete floors broom clean in unoccupied spaces. 
i. Vacuum carpet and similar soft surfaces, removing debris 
and excess nap; clean according to manufacturer’s 
recommendations if visible soil or stains remain. 



j. Strip ( if needed) and wax appropriate floors. VA will 
supply stripper, wax and finisher. Apply 3 coats of wax. 
k. Clean transparent materials, including mirrors and glass 
in doors and windows. Remove glazing compounds and other 
noticeable, vision-obscuring materials. Replace chipped 
or broken glass and other damaged transparent materials. 
Polish mirrors and glass, taking care not to scratch 
surfaces. 
l. Remove labels that are not permanent. 
m. Wipe surfaces of mechanical and electrical equipment 
(elevator equipment) and similar equipment. Remove excess 
lubrication, paint and mortar droppings, and other foreign 
substances. 
n. Clean plumbing fixtures to a sanitary condition, free of 
stains, including stains resulting from water exposure. 
o. Replace disposable air filters and clean permanent air 
filters. Clean exposed surfaces of diffusers, registers, 
and grills. 
p. Clean light fixtures, lamps, globes, and reflectors to 
function with full efficiency. 
q. Leave Project clean and ready for occupancy. 


 

 

--- E N D --- 

 


SECTION 01 81 11 

SUSTAINABLE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 SUMMARY 

 This Section describes general requirements and procedures to comply 
with the Guiding Principles for Leadership in High Performance and 
Sustainable Buildings Memorandum of Understanding incorporated in the 
Executive Orders 13423 and 13514; Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPA 2005) 
and the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA 2007). All 
applicable points on the attached LEED 2009 for Healthcare (LEEDHC)
Guiding Principles checklist are mandatory. 

 

1.2 OBJECTIVES 

A. To maximize resource efficiency and reduce the environmental impacts of 
construction and operation, the Contractor during the construction 
phase of this project shall implement the following procedures: 

1. Select products that minimize consumption of energy, water and nonrenewable 
resources, while minimizing the amounts of pollution 
resulting from the production and employment of building 
technologies. It is the intent of this project to conform to EPA’s 
Five Guiding Principles on environmentally preferable purchasing. 
The five principles are: 

a. Include environmental considerations as part of the normal 
purchasing process. 

b. Emphasize pollution prevention early in the purchasing process. 

c. Examine multiple environmental attributes throughout a product’s 
or service’s life cycle. 

d. Compare relevant environmental impacts when selecting products 
and services. 

e. Collect and base purchasing decisions on accurate and meaningful 
information about environmental performance. 

2. Control sources for potential Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) pollutants by 
controlled selection of materials and processes used in project 
construction in order to attain superior IAQ. 


3. Use building practices that insure construction debris and 
particulates do not contaminate or enter duct work prior to system 
startup and turn over. 

4. Products and processes that achieve the above objectives to the 
extent currently possible and practical have been selected and 
included in these Construction Documents. The Contractor is 
responsible to maintain and support these objectives in developing 
means and methods for performing the work of this Contract and in 
proposing product substitutions and/or changes to specified 
processes. 

5. This project has been designed to comply with the LEED for 
Healthcare Guiding Principles Checklist. The design team has 
documented compliance with all design credits and pre-requisites in 
the checklist. It is the contractor’s responsibility to implement and 
document all construction credits. 

 

1.3 RELATED DOCUMENTS 

A. Section 01 74 19 CONSTRUCTION WASTE MANAGEMENT 

B. Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS 

C. Appendix A: Sample Construction IAQ Management Plan 

D. Appendix B: LEED for Health Care, Guiding Principles Checklist 

E. Appendix C: LEED 2009 for Healthcare, Guiding Principles Construction 
Credit Documentation Forms 

 

1.4 DEFINITIONS 

A. Agrifiber Products: Composite panel products derived from agricultural 
fiber. 

B. Biobased Product: As defined in the 2002 Farm Bill, a product 
determined by the Secretary to be a commercial or industrial product 
(other than food or feed) that is composed, in whole or in significant 
part, of biological products or renewable domestic agricultural 
materials (including plant, animal, and marine materials) or forestry 
materials. 

C. Biobased Content: The weight of the biobased material divided by the 
total weight of the product and expressed as a percentage by weight. 

D. Certificates of Chain-of-Custody: Certificates signed by manufacturers 
certifying that wood used to make products has been tracked through its 


extraction and fabrication to ensure that it was obtained from forests 
certified by a specified certification program. 

E. Composite Wood: A product consisting of wood fiber or other plant 
particles bonded together by a resin or binder. 

F. Construction and Demolition Waste: Includes solid wastes, such as 
building materials, packaging, rubbish, debris, and rubble resulting 
from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations. A 
construction waste management plan is to be provided by the Contractor 
as defined in Section 01 74 19. 

G. Third Party Certification: Certification of levels of environmental 
achievement by nationally recognized sustainability rating system. 

H. Light Pollution: Light that extends beyond its source such that the 
additional light is wasted in an unwanted area or in an area where it 
inhibits view of the night sky. 

I. Recycled Content Materials: Products that contain pre-consumer or postconsumer 
materials as all or part of their feedstock. 

J. Post-Consumer Recycled Content: The percentage by weight of constituent 
materials that have been recovered or otherwise diverted from the 
solid-waste stream after consumer use. 

K. Pre-Consumer Recycled Content: Materials that have been recovered or 
otherwise diverted from the solid-waste stream during the manufacturing 
process. Pre-consumer content must be material that would not have 
otherwise entered the waste stream as per Section 5 of the FTC Act, 
Part 260 “Guidelines for the Use of Environmental Marketing Claims”: 

 www.ftc.gov/bcp/grnrule/guides980427. 

L. Regional Materials: Materials that are extracted, harvested, recovered, 
and manufactured within a radius of 250 miles (400 km) from the Project 
site. 

M. Salvaged or Reused Materials: Materials extracted from existing 
buildings in order to be reused in other buildings without being 
manufactured. 

N. Sealant: Any material that fills and seals gaps between other 
materials. 

O. Type 1 Finishes: Materials and finishes which have a potential for 
short-term levels of off gassing from chemicals inherent in their 
manufacturing process, or which are applied in a form requiring 


vehicles or carriers for spreading which release a high level of 
particulate matter in the process of installation and/or curing. 

P. Type 2 Finishes: “Fuzzy" materials and finishes which are woven, 
fibrous, or porous in nature and tend to adsorb chemicals off gas. 

Q. Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs): Any compound of carbon, excluding 
carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, carbonic acid, metallic carbides or 
carbonates, and ammonium carbonate, which participates in atmospheric 
photochemical reactions. Compounds that have negligible photochemical 
reactivity, listed in EPA 40 CFR 51.100(s), are also excluded from this 
regulatory definition. 

 

 1.5 SUBMITTALS 

A. Sustainable Design Submittals: 


1. Water Conserving Fixtures: Submittals must include manufacturer’s cut 
sheets for all water-consuming plumbing fixtures and fittings 
(toilets, urinals, faucets, shower heads, etc.) highlighting maximum 
flow rates and/or flush rates. Include cut sheets for any automatic 
faucet-control devices. 

2. Process Water Use: Provide manufacturer’s cut sheets for all waterconsuming 
commercial equipment (clothes washers, dishwashers, ice 
machines, etc.), highlighting water consumption performance. Include 
manufacturer’s cut sheets or product data for any cooling towers, 
highlighting water consumption estimates, water use reduction 
measures, and corrosion inhibitors. 

3. Elimination of CFCs AND HCFCs: Provide manufacturer’s cut sheets for 
all cooling equipment with manufacturer’s product data, highlighting 
refrigerants; provide manufacturer’s cut sheets for all firesuppression 
equipment, highlighting fire-suppression agents; provide 
manufacturer’s cut-sheets for all polystyrene insulation (XPS) and 
closed-cell spray foam polyurethane insulation, highlighting the 
blowing agent(s). 


4. Appliances and Equipment: Provide copies of manufacturer’s product 
data for all Energy Star eligible equipment and appliances, 
including office equipment, computers and printers, electronics, and 
commercial food service equipment (excluding HVAC and lighting 
components), verifying compliance with EPA’s Energy Star program and 
anticipated energy use of each piece of equipment or appliance. 

5. Measurement and Verification Systems: Provide cut sheets and 
manufacturer’s product data for all controls systems, highlighting 
electrical metering and trending capability components. 

6. Sustainably Sourced Materials and Products, Recycled Content: 
Submittals for all materials with recycled content (excluding MEP 
systems equipment and components) must include the following 
documentation: Manufacturer’s product data, product literature, or a 
letter from the manufacturer verifying the percentage of postconsumer 
and pre-consumer recycled content (by weight) of each 
material or product 

a. An electronic spreadsheet that tabulates the Project’s total 
materials cost and combined recycled content value (defined as 
the sum of the post-consumer recycled content value plus one-half 
of the pre-consumer recycled content value) expressed as a 
percentage of total materials cost. This spreadsheet shall be 
submitted every third month with the Contractor’s Certificate and 
Application for Payment. It should indicate, on an ongoing basis, 
line items for each material, including cost, pre-consumer 
recycled content, post-consumer recycled content, and combined 
recycled content value. 






b. Documentation of compliance with any relevant IEQ Credit 4: Low- 
Emitting Materials requirements for regional materials installed 
on the interior of the building. 

7. Sustainably Sourced Materials and Products, Regional Materials: 
Submittals for all products or materials expected to contribute to 
the regional calculation (excluding MEP systems equipment and 
components) must include the following documentation: 

a. Cost of each material or product, excluding cost of labor and 
equipment for installation 

b. Location of product manufacture and distance from point of 
manufacture to the Project Site 


c. Location of point of extraction, harvest, or recovery for each 
raw material in each product and distance from the point of 
extraction, harvest, or recovery to the Project Site 

d. Manufacturer’s product data, product literature, or a letter from 
the manufacturer verifying the location and distance from the 
Project Site to the point of manufacture for each regional 
material 

e. Manufacturer’s product data, product literature, or a letter from 
the manufacturer verifying the location and distance from the 
Project Site to the point of extraction, harvest, or recovery for 
each regional material or product, including, at a minimum, 
gravel and fill, planting materials, concrete, masonry, and GWB 

f. An electronic spreadsheet that tabulates the Project’s total 
materials cost and regional materials value, expressed as a 
percentage of total materials cost. This spreadsheet shall be 
submitted every third month with the Contractor’s Certificate and 
Application for Payment. It should indicate on an ongoing basis, 
line items for each material, including cost, location of 
manufacture, distance from manufacturing plant to the Project 
Site, location of raw material extraction, and distance from 
extraction point to the Project Site. 

g. Documentation of compliance with any relevant IEQ Credit 4: Low- 
Emitting Materials requirements for regional materials installed 
on the interior of the building. 

8. Sustainably Sourced Materials and Products, Certified Wood Products: 
Provide Chain of Custody Certification that all wood products are 
made from FSC certified wood. All wood products must also meet the 
relevant IEQ Credit 4: Low-Emitting Materials requirements to 
contribute toward the Sustainably Sourced Materials and Products 
credit. 

9. Low Emitting Materials, Interior Adhesives and Sealants: Submittals 
for all field-applied adhesives and sealants, which have a potential 
impact on indoor air, must include manufacturer’s MSDSs or other 
Product Data highlighting VOC content, and demonstrating compliance 
with specified maximum VOC content: 


a. Provide manufacturers’ documentation verifying all adhesives used 
to apply laminates, whether shop-applied or field-applied, 
contain no urea-formaldehyde. 

10. Low Emitting Materials, Interior Paints and Coatings: Submittals for 
all field-applied paints and coatings, which have a potential impact 
on indoor air, must include manufacturer’s MSDSs or other Product 
Data highlighting VOC content, and demonstrating compliance with 
specified maximum VOC content. 

11. Exterior Paints and Coatings: Submittals for all field-applied 
paints and coatings, which have a potential impact on ambient air 
quality, must include manufacturer’s MSDSs or other manufacturer’s 
Product Data highlighting VOC content. 

12. Low Emitting Materials, Floor coverings: 

 

a. Resilient Flooring and Engineered Wood Flooring: Submittals for 
all engineered wood flooring must include manufacturer’s product 
data verifying certification under either the Greenguard or 
FloorScore indoor emissions testing program. 

13. Low Emitting Materials, Fiberglass Insulation: Provide 
manufacturer’s cut sheets or product data verifying that fiberglass 
batt insulation contains no urea-formaldehyde. 

14. Low Emitting Materials, Composite Wood and Agrifiber Binders: 
Submittals for all composite wood and agrifiber products (including 
but not limited to particleboard, wheatboard, strawboard, agriboard 
products, engineered wood components, solid-core wood doors, OSB, 
MDF, and plywood products) must include manufacturer’s product data 
verifying that these products contain no urea-formaldehyde resins. 

15. Low Emitting Materials, Systems Furniture and Seating: For all new 
furnishings, provide manufacturer’s product data verifying that all 
new systems furniture and seating products meet the requirements of 
one of the following: 

a. Greenguard certification 

b. SCS Indoor Advantage certification 

c. SCS Indoor Advantage Gold certification 

d. BIFMA Standard X7.1-2005, as tested to BIFMA method M7.1-2005 
and as verified by an independent laboratory 


16. Air Filtration: Provide manufacturer’s cut sheets and 
product data highlighting the following: 

a. Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) for filtration media in 
all air handling units (AHUs) per ASHRAE HVAC Design Manual for 
Hospitals and Clinics. 

b. Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) for filtration media 
installed at return air grilles during construction if 
permanently installed AHUs are used during construction. See 
above for requirements. 

17. Mercury in Lighting: Provide manufacturer’s cut sheets or product 
data for all fluorescent or HID lamps highlighting mercury content. 

18. Lighting Controls: Provide manufacturer’s cut sheets and shop 
drawing documentation highlighting all lighting controls systems 
components. 

19. Thermal Comfort Controls: Provide manufacturer’s cut sheets and shop 
drawing documentation highlighting all thermal comfort-control 
systems components. 

20. It is the intent of this specification to reduce CO2 emissions and 
other environmentally detrimental effects resulting from the 
production of Portland Cement by requiring that all concrete mixes, 
in aggregate, utilize blended cement mixes to displace Portland 
Cement as specified in Section 03 30 00, CONCRETE typically included 
in conventional construction. Provide the following submittals: 

a. Copies of concrete design mixes for all installed concrete 

b. Copies of typical regional baseline concrete design mixes for all 
compressive strengths used on the Project. 

c. Quantities in cubic yards of each installed concrete mix. 

21. Gypsum Wall Board: Provide manufacturer’s cut sheets or product data 
verifying that all gypsum wallboard products are moisture and moldresistant. 


22. Duct Acoustical Insulation: Provide manufacturer’s cut sheets or 
product data verifying that mechanical sound insulation materials in 
air distribution ducts consists of an impervious, non-porous 
coatings that prevent dust from accumulating in the insulating 
materials. 

 

B. Project Materials Cost Data: Provide a spreadsheet in an electronic 
file indicating the total cost for the Project and the total cost of 


Sustainably Sourced Building Materials, Products, and Furnishings, as 
follows: 

1. Not more than 60 days after the Pre-construction Meeting, the 
General Contractor shall provide to the Owner and Architect a 
preliminary schedule of materials costs for all materials used for 
the Project organized by specification section. Exclude labor costs 
and all mechanical, electrical, and plumbing (MEP) systems materials 
and labor costs. Include the following: 

a. Identify each Sustainably Sourced Material and Product, including 
all materials and products with Regional content, Recycled 
Content, and Certified Wood, and calculate their cumulative value 
of as a percentage of total materials costs. 

d. Identify any furniture and medical furnishings included in this 
scope or work, their cost, and the total value of Sustainably 
Sourced Furniture and Medical Furnishings as a % of the total 
Furniture and Medical Furnishings cost for the project. 

2. Provide final versions of the above spreadsheets to the Owner and 
Architect not more than 14 days after Substantial Completion. 

 

C. Construction Waste Management: See Section 01 74 19 “Construction Waste 
Management” for submittal requirements. 

D. Construction Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Management (See attached Appendix 
A: Sample Construction IAQ Management Plan): Submittals must include 
the following: 

1. Not more than 30 days after the Preconstruction Meeting, prepare and 
submit for the Architect and Owner’s approval, an electronic copy of 
the draft Construction IAQ Management Plan in an electronic file 
format. See attachment A: SAMPLE IAQ Management Plan for Guidance. 
The construction IAQ Management plan should include, but is not 
limited to, descriptions of the following: 

2. Instruction procedures for meeting or exceeding the minimum 
requirements of the Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning National 
Contractors Association (SMACNA) IAQ Guidelines for Occupied 
Buildings Under Construction, 1995, Chapter 3, including procedures 
for HVAC Protection, Source Control, Pathway Interruption, 
Housekeeping, and Scheduling 


a. Instruction procedures for protecting absorptive materials stored 
on-site or installed from moisture damage 

b. Schedule of submission to Architect of photographs of on-site 
construction IAQ management measures such as protection of ducts 
and on-site stored oil installed absorptive materials 

c. Instruction procedures if air handlers must be used during 
construction, including a description of filtration media to be 
used at each return air grille 

d. Instruction procedure for replacing all air-filtration media 
immediately prior to occupancy after completion of construction, 
including a description of filtration media to be used at each 
air handling or air supply unit 

3. Not more than 30 days following receipt of the approved draft 
CIAQMP, submit an electronic copy of the approved CIAQMP in an 
electronic file, along with the following: 

a. Manufacturer’s cut sheets and product data highlighting the 
Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) for all filtration 
media to be installed at return air grilles during construction 
if permanently installed AHUs are used during construction. 

b. Manufacturer’s cut sheets and product data highlighting the 
Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) for filtration media in 
all air handling units (AHUs). 

4. Not more than 14 days after Substantial Completion provide the 
following: 

a. Documentation verifying required replacement of air filtration 
media in all air handling units (AHUs) after the completion of 
construction and prior to occupancy and, if applicable, required 
installation of filtration during construction. 

b. Minimum of 18 Construction photographs: Six photographs taken on 
three different occasions during construction of the SMACNA 
approaches employed, along with a brief description of each 
approach, documenting implementation of the IAQ management 
measures, such as protection of ducts and on-site stored or 
installed absorptive materials. 

c. A copy of the report from testing and inspecting agency 
documenting the results of IAQ testing, demonstrating conformance 


with IAQ testing procedures and requirements defined in Section 
01 81 09 “Testing for Indoor Air Quality.” 

 

E. Commissioning: See Section 01 91 00 “General Commissioning Requirements” 
for submittal requirements. 

F. Sustainable Design Progress Reports: Concurrent with each Application 
for Payment, submit reports for the following: 

1. Construction Waste Management: Waste reduction progress reports and 
logs complying with the requirements of Section 01 74 19 
”Construction Waste Management.” 

2. Construction IAQ Management: See details below under Section 3.2 
Construction Indoor Air Quality Management for Construction IAQ 
management progress report requirements. 

3. Materials: Progress reports on the Submittals required in Section 
1.5 to document achievement of MR Credits 3 and 5: Sustainably 
Sourced Materials, Products, Furniture and Medical Furnishings, and 
IEQc4 Low Emitting Materials. 

 

1.6 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Preconstruction Meeting: After award of Contract and prior to the 
commencement of the Work, schedule and conduct meeting with Owner, 
Architect, and all Subcontractors to discuss the Construction Waste 
Management Plan, the required Construction Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) 
Management Plan, and all other Sustainable Design Requirements. The 
purpose of this meeting is to develop a mutual understanding of the 
Project’s Sustainable Design Requirements and coordination of the 
Contractor’s management of these requirements with the Contracting 
Officer and the Construction Quality Manager. 

B. Construction Job Conferences: The status of compliance with the 
Sustainable Design Requirements of these specifications will be an 
agenda item at all regular job meetings conducted during the course of 
work at the site. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 PRODUCT ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 

A. Site Clearing: Topsoil shall be provided by the Contractor from on-site 
material which has been stockpiled for reuse. Off-site borrow should 


only be used when on-site sources are exhausted. Chip and/or compost on 
site all vegetated material identified for removal. B. Do not burn 
rubbish, organic matter, etc. or any material on the site. Dispose of 
legally in accordance with Specifications Sections 01 74 19. D. 
Exterior Lighting Fixtures: 

1. All exterior luminaires must emit 0% of the total initial designed 
fixture lumens at an angle above 90° from nadir and/or meet the 
requirements of the Dark Sky certification program. 

2. Exterior lighting cannot exceed 80% of the lighting power densities 
defined by ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2004, Exterior Lighting 
Section, without amendments. 

3. No lighting of building facades or landscape features is permitted. 
G. Water-Conserving Fixtures: Plumbing fixtures and fittings shall 
use in aggregate at least 20% less water than the water use baseline 
calculated for the building after meeting the Energy Policy Act of 
1992 fixture performance requirements. Flow and flush rates shall 
not exceed the following: 

1. Toilets: no more than 1.3 gallons per flush, otherwise be dual flush 
1.6/0.8 gallons per flush, and have documented bowl evacuation 
capability per MaP testing of at least 400 grams 

2. Urinals: Waterless or Water sense rated with no more than 0.5 
gallons per flush. 

3. Lavatory Faucets: 0.5 gpm with automatic faucet controls 

4. Kitchen Sink Lavatories: 2.2 gpm 

5. Showerheads: no more than 1.5gpm 

H. Process Water Use: Employ strategies that in aggregate result in 20% 
less water use than the process water use baseline for the building 
after meeting the commercial equipment and HVAC performance 
requirements as listed in the Table below. For equipment not addressed 
by EPACT 2005 or the list below, additional equipment performance 
requirements may be proposed provided documentation supporting the 
proposed benchmark or industry standard is submitted. 

1. Clothes Washer: 7.5 gallons/cubic foot/cycle 

2. Dishwasher with Racks: 1.0 gallons/rack 

3. Ice Machine: 20 gallons/100 pounds ice for machines making over 175 
pounds of ice per day; 30 gallons/100 pounds ice for machines making 
less than 175 ice per day. Avoid water-cooled machines. 


4. Food Steamer: 2 gallons/hour. Use only boilerless steamers. 

5. Pre-Rinse Spray Valves: 1.4 gallons/minute 

6. Kitchen Pot-Washing Sinks: 2.2 gallons/minute 

7. Cooling Towers: 2.3 gallons/ton-hr. water loss I. Elimination of 
CFCs AND HCFCs: 

1. Ozone Protection and Greenhouse Gas Reduction: Base building cooling 
equipment shall contain no refrigerants other than the following: 
HCFC-123, HFC-134a, HFC-245fa, HFC-407c, or HFC 410a. 

2. Fire suppression systems may not contain ozone-depleting substances 
such as halon 1301 and 1211. 

3. Extruded polystyrene insulation (XPS) and closed-cell spray foam 
polyurethane insulation shall not be manufactured with 
hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) blowing agents. 

J. Appliances and Equipment: All materials and equipment being installed 
that falls under the Energy Star or FEMP programs must be Energy Star 
or FEMP-rated. Eligible equipment includes refrigerators, motors, 
laundry equipment, office equipment and more. Refer to each program’s 
website for a complete list. 

K. HVAC Distribution Efficiency: 

1. All duct systems shall be constructed of aluminum, stainless steel 
or galvanized sheet metal, as deemed appropriate based on the 
application requirements. No fiberglass duct board shall be 
permitted. 

2. All medium- and high-pressure ductwork systems shall be pressuretested 
in accordance with the current SMACNA standards. 

3. All ductwork shall be externally insulated. No interior duct liner 
shall be permitted. 

4. Where possible, all air terminal connections shall be hard-connected 
with sheet metal ductwork. If flexible ductwork is used, no flexible 
duct extension shall be more than six feet in length. 

5. All HVAC equipment shall be isolated from the ductwork system with 
flexible duct connectors to minimize the transmittance of vibration. 

6. All supply and return air branch ducts shall include the appropriate 
style of volume damper. Air terminal devices such as grilles, 
registers, and diffusers shall be balanced at duct branch dampers, 
not at terminal face. 

N. Recycled Content of Materials: 


1. Provide building materials with recycled content such that postconsumer 
recycled content value plus half the pre-consumer recycled 
content value contributes to the credit requirements for 20% 
Sustainably Sourced Materials and Products. Recycled content value 
is exclusive of all MEP equipment, labor, and delivery costs. The 
Contractor shall make all attempts to maximize the procurement of 
materials with recycled content. 

a. e post-consumer recycled content value of a material shall be 
determined by dividing the weight of post-consumer recycled 
content by the total weight of the material and multiplying by 
the cost of the material. 

b. Do not include mechanical and electrical components in the 
calculations. 

c. Do not include labor and delivery costs in the calculations. 

d. Recycled content of materials shall be defined according to the 
Federal Trade Commission’s “Guide for the Use of Environmental 
Marketing Claims,” 16 CFR 260.7 (e). 

e. Utilize all on-site existing paving materials that are scheduled 
for demolition as granulated fill, and include the cost of this 
material had it been purchased in the calculations for recycled 
content value. 

f. The materials in the following list must contain the minimum 
recycled content indicated: 

Category 

Minimum Recycled Content 

Compost/mulch 

100% post-consumer 

Asphaltic Concrete Paving 

25% post-consumer 

Cast-in-Place Concrete 

6% pre-consumer 

CMU: Gray Block 

20% pre-consumer 

Steel Reinforcing Bars 

90% combined 

Structural Steel Shapes 

90% combined 




Steel Joists 

75% combined 

Steel Deck 

75% combined 

Steel Fabrications 

60% combined 

Steel Studs 

30% combined 

Steel Roofing 

30% post-consumer 

Aluminum Fabrications 

35% combined 

Rigid Insulation 

20% pre-consumer 

Batt insulation 

30% combined 



 

 

 

O. Biobased Content: 

1. For products designated by the USDA’s BioPreferred program, provide 
products that meet or exceed USDA recommendations for biobased 
content, so long as products meet all other performance requirements 
in VA master specifications. For more information regarding the 
product categories covered by the BioPreferred program, visit 
http://www.biopreferred.gov 

P. Interior Adhesives and Sealants: All field-applied adhesives and 
sealants, which have a potential impact on indoor air, must comply with 
maximum VOC content listed below. All adhesives used to apply 
laminates, whether shop-applied or field-applied, must contain no ureaformaldehyde. 


1. Wood Glues: 30 g/L. 

2. Metal to Metal Adhesives: 30 g/L. 

3. Adhesives for Porous Materials (Except Wood): 50 g/L. 

4. Subfloor Adhesives: 50 g/L. 

5. Plastic Foam Adhesives: 50 g/L. 

6. Carpet Adhesives: 50 g/L. 

7. Carpet Pad Adhesives: 50 g/L. 

8. VCT and Asphalt Tile Adhesives: 50 g/L. 

9. Cove Base Adhesives: 50 g/L. 


10. Gypsum Board and Panel Adhesives: 50 g/L. 

11. Rubber Floor Adhesives: 60 g/L. 

12. Ceramic Tile Adhesives: 65 g/L. 

13. Multipurpose Construction Adhesives: 70 g/L. 

14. Fiberglass Adhesives: 80 g/L. 

15. Contact Adhesive: 80 g/L. 

16. Structural Glazing Adhesives: 100 g/L. 

17. Wood Flooring Adhesive: 100 g/L. 

18. Structural Wood Member Adhesive: 140 g/L. 

19. Special Purpose Contact Adhesive (contact adhesive that is 
used to bond melamine covered board, metal, unsupported 
vinyl, Teflon, ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene, 
rubber or wood veneer 1/16 inch or less in thickness to any 
surface): 250 g/L. 

20. Top and Trim Adhesive: 250 g/L. 

21. Plastic Cement Welding Compounds: 250 g/L. 

22. ABS Welding Compounds: 325 g/L. 

23. CPVC Welding Compounds: 490 g/L. 

24. PVC Welding Compounds: 510 g/L. 

25. Adhesive Primer for Plastic: 550 g/L. 

26. Sheet Applied Rubber Lining Adhesive: 850 g/L. 

27. Aerosol Adhesive, General Purpose Mist Spray: 65 percent by 
weight. 

28. Aerosol Adhesive, General Purpose Web Spray: 55 percent by 
weight. 

29. Special Purpose Aerosol Adhesive (All Types): 70 percent by 
weight. 

30. Other Adhesives: 250 g/L. 

31. Architectural Sealants: 250 g/L. 

32. Nonmembrane Roof Sealants: 300 g/L. 

33. Single-Ply Roof Membrane Sealants: 450 g/L. 

34. Other Sealants: 420 g/L. 

35. Sealant Primers for Nonporous Substrates: 250 g/L. 

36. Sealant Primers for Porous Substrates: 775 g/L. 

37. Modified Bituminous Sealant Primers: 500 g/L. 

38. Other Sealant Primers: 750 g/L. 

 

Q. Interior Paints and Coatings: All field-applied paints and coatings, 
which have a potential impact on indoor air, comply with specified 
maximum VOC content and hazardous material restrictions below: 

1. Flat Paints, Coatings, and Primers: VOC not more than 50 
g/L. 

2. Nonflat Paints, Coatings, and Primers: VOC not more than 150 
g/L. 

3. Anticorrosive and Antirust Paints Applied to Ferrous Metals: 
VOC not more than 250 g/L 

4. Clear Wood Finishes, Varnishes: VOC not more than 350 g/L. 

5. Clear Wood Finishes, Lacquers: VOC not more than 550 g/L. 


6. Floor Coatings: VOC not more than 100 g/L. 

7. Shellacs, Clear: VOC not more than 730 g/L. 

8. Shellacs, Pigmented: VOC not more than 550 g/L. 

9. Stains: VOC not more than 250 g/L. 

10. Dry-Fog Coatings: VOC not more than 400 g/L. 

11. Zinc-Rich Industrial Maintenance Primers: VOC not more than 
340 g/L. 

12. Pretreatment Wash Primers: VOC not more than 420 g/L. 

13. Aromatic Compounds: Paints and coatings shall not contain 
more than 1.0 percent by weight total aromatic compounds 
(hydrocarbon compounds containing one or more benzene rings). 

14. Restricted Components: Paints and coatings shall not contain 
any of the following: 

a. Acrolein. 

b. Acrylonitrile. 

c. Antimony. 

d. Benzene. 

e. Butyl benzyl phthalate. 

f. Cadmium. 

g. Di (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate. 

h. Di-n-butyl phthalate. 

i. Di-n-octyl phthalate. 

j. 1,2-dichlorobenzene. 

k. Diethyl phthalate. 

l. Dimethyl phthalate. 

m. Ethylbenzene. 

n. Formaldehyde. 

o. Hexavalent chromium. 

p. Isophorone. 

q. Lead. 

r. Mercury. 

s. Methyl ethyl ketone. 

t. Methyl isobutyl ketone. 

u. Methylene chloride. 

v. Naphthalene. 

w. Toluene (methylbenzene). 

x. 1,1,1-trichloroethane. 

y. Vinyl chloride. 

R. Floorcoverings: 

 a.Resilient Flooring and Base must be certified through the Floor 
Score 2 Standard- current version. All flooring and base adhesives 
have a maximum VOC content of 50 g/l. 

S. Composite Wood and Agrifiber Products: All composite wood and 
agrifiber products (including but not limited to particleboard, 
wheatboard, strawboard, agriboard products, engineered wood 
components, solid-core wood doors, OSB, MDF, and plywood products) 
must contain no urea-formaldehyde resins. 


T. Systems Furniture and Seating: All systems furniture and seating 
products must meet the requirements of one of the following: 

a. Greenguard certification 

b. SCS Indoor Advantage certification 

c. SCS Indoor Advantage Gold certification 

d. BIFMA Standard X7.1-2005, as tested to BIFMA method M7.1-2005 and 
as verified by an independent laboratory 

U. Lighting: All fluorescent or HID lamps shall have an average mercury 
content of less than 80 picograms per lumen hour. 

V. Fiberglass Insulation: All fiberglass batt insulation shall contain 
no added urea-formaldehyde binders. 

Q. Certified Wood Products: A minimum of 50% of all wood products, 
including wood doors, millwork, cabinets, concrete formwork, and 
blocking shall be made from FSC certified wood. 

R. Herbicides and Pest Control: Herbicides shall not be permitted, and 

pest control measures shall utilize EPA-registered biopesticides 
only. - - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 01 91 00 

GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 COMMISSIONING DESCRIPTION 

A. This Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS shall form the 
basis of the construction phase commissioning process and procedures. 
The Commissioning Agent shall add, modify, and refine the commissioning 
procedures, as approved by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), to 
suit field conditions and actual manufacturer's equipment, incorporate 
test data and procedure results, and provide detailed scheduling for 
all commissioning tasks. 

B. Various sections of the project specifications require equipment 
startup, testing, and adjusting services. Requirements for startup, 
testing, and adjusting services specified in Division 21, Division 22, 
Division 23, Division 26, Division 27, and Division 28 series sections 
of these specifications are intended to be provided in coordination 
with the commissioning services and are not intended to duplicate 
services. The Contractor shall coordinate the work required by 
individual specification sections with the commissioning services 
requirements specified herein. 

C. Where individual testing, adjusting, or related services are required 
in the project specifications and not specifically required by this 
commissioning requirements specification, the specified services shall 
be provided and copies of documentation, as required by those 
specifications shall be submitted to the VA and the Commissioning Agent 
to be indexed for future reference. 

D. Where training or educational services for VA are required and 
specified in other sections of the specifications, including but not 
limited to Division 21, Division 22, Division 23, Division 26, Division 
27, and Division 28 series sections of the specification, these 
services are intended to be provided in addition to the training and 
educational services specified herein. 

E. Commissioning is a systematic process of verifying that the building 
systems perform interactively according to the construction documents 
and the VA’s operational needs. The commissioning process shall 
encompass and coordinate the system documentation, equipment startup, 
control system calibration, testing and balancing, performance testing 


and training. Commissioning during the construction and post-occupancy 
phases is intended to achieve the following specific objectives 
according to the contract documents: 

1. Verify that the applicable equipment and systems are installed in 
accordance with the contact documents and according to the 
manufacturer's recommendations. 

2. Verify and document proper integrated performance of equipment and 
systems. 

3. Verify that Operations & Maintenance documentation is complete. 

4. Verify that all components requiring servicing can be accessed, 
serviced and removed without disturbing nearby components including 
ducts, piping, cabling or wiring. 

5. Verify that the VA’s operating personnel are adequately trained to 
enable them to operate, monitor, adjust, maintain, and repair 
building systems in an effective and energy-efficient manner. 

6. Document the successful achievement of the commissioning objectives 
listed above. 

F. The commissioning process does not take away from or reduce the 
responsibility of the Contractor to provide a finished and fully 
functioning product. 

1.2 CONTRACTUAL RELATIONSHIPS 

A. For this construction project, the Department of Veterans Affairs 
contracts with a Contractor to provide construction services. The 
contracts are administered by the VA Contracting Officer and the COR as 
the designated representative of the Contracting Officer. On this 
project, the authority to modify the contract in any way is strictly 
limited to the authority of the Contracting Officer. 

B. In this project, only two contract parties are recognized and 
communications on contractual issues are strictly limited to VA COR and 
the Contractor. It is the practice of the VA to require that 
communications between other parties to the contracts (Subcontractors 
and Vendors) be conducted through the COR and Contractor. It is also 
the practice of the VA that communications between other parties of the 
project (Commissioning Agent and Architect/Engineer) be conducted 
through the COR. 

C. Whole Building Commissioning is a process that relies upon frequent and 
direct communications, as well as collaboration between all parties to 
the construction process. By its nature, a high level of communication 


and cooperation between the Commissioning Agent and all other parties 
(Architects, Engineers, Subcontractors, Vendors, third party testing 
agencies, etc.) is essential to the success of the Commissioning 
effort. 

D. With these fundamental practices in mind, the commissioning process 
described herein has been developed to recognize that, in the execution 
of the Commissioning Process, the Commissioning Agent must develop 
effective methods to communicate with every member of the construction 
team involved in delivering commissioned systems while simultaneously 
respecting the exclusive contract authority of the Contracting Officer 
and COR. Thus, the procedures outlined in this specification must be 
executed within the following limitations: 

1. No communications (verbal or written) from the Commissioning Agent 
shall be deemed to constitute direction that modifies the terms of 
any contract between the Department of Veterans Affairs and the 
Contractor. 

2. Commissioning Issues identified by the Commissioning Agent will be 
delivered to the COR and copied to the designated Commissioning 
Representatives for the Contractor and subcontractors on the 
Commissioning Team for information only in order to expedite the 
communication process. These issues must be understood as the 
professional opinion of the Commissioning Agent and as suggestions 
for resolution. 

3. In the event that any Commissioning Issues and suggested resolutions 
are deemed by the COR to require either an official interpretation 
of the construction documents or require a modification of the 
contract documents, the Contracting Officer or COR will issue an 
official directive to this effect. 

4. All parties to the Commissioning Process shall be individually 
responsible for alerting the COR of any issues that they deem to 
constitute a potential contract change prior to acting on these 
issues. 

5. Authority for resolution or modification of design and construction 
issues rests solely with the Contracting Officer or COR, with 
appropriate technical guidance from the Architect/Engineer and/or 
Commissioning Agent. 

1.3 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 00 00 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 



B. Section 21 08 00 COMMISSIONING OF FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS. 
C. Section 22 08 00 COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 
D. Section 23 08 00 COMMISSIONING OF HVAC SYSTEMS. 
E. Section 26 08 00 COMMISSIONING OF ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS. 
F. Section 27 08 00 COMMISSIONING OF COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS. 
G. Section 28 08 00 COMMISSIONING OF ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND SECURITY 
SYSTEMS. 


1.4 SUMMARY 

A. This Section includes general requirements that apply to implementation 
of commissioning without regard to systems, subsystems, and equipment 
being commissioned. 

B. The commissioning activities have been developed to support the VA 
requirements to meet guidelines for Federal Leadership in 
Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance. 

C. The commissioning activities have been developed to support the United 
States Green Building Council’s (USGBC) LEED ™ rating program and to 
support delivery of project performance in accordance with the VA 
requirements developed for the project to support the following 
credits: 

1. Commissioning activities and documentation for the LEED™ section on 
“Energy and Atmosphere” and the prerequisite of “Fundamental 
Building Systems Commissioning.” 

2. Commissioning activities and documentation for the LEED™ section on 
“Energy and Atmosphere” requirements for the “Enhanced Building 
System Commissioning” credit. 

3. Activities and documentation for the LEED™ section on “Measurement 
and Verification” requirements for the Measurement and Verification 
credit. 

1.5 ACRONYMS 

List of Acronyms 

Acronym 

Meaning 

A/E 

Architect / Engineer Design Team 

AHJ 

Authority Having Jurisdiction 

ASHRAE 

Association Society for Heating Air Condition and 
Refrigeration Engineers 

BOD 

Basis of Design 

BSC 

Building Systems Commissioning 




List of Acronyms 



Acronym 

Meaning 

CCTV 

Closed Circuit Television 

CD 

Construction Documents 

CO 

Contracting Officer (VA) 

COR 

Contracting Officer’s Representative (see also VA-RE) 

COBie 

Construction Operations Building Information Exchange 

CPC 

Construction Phase Commissioning 

Cx 

Commissioning 

CxA 

Commissioning Agent 

CxM 

Commissioning Manager 

CxR 

Commissioning Representative 

DPC 

Design Phase Commissioning 

FPT 

Functional Performance Test 

HVAC 

Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning 

LEED 

Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design 

NEBB 

National Environmental Balancing Bureau 

O&M 

Operations & Maintenance 

OPR 

Owner’s Project Requirements 

PFC 

Pre-Functional Checklist 

PFT 

Pre-Functional Test 

SD 

Schematic Design 

SO 

Site Observation 

TAB 

Test Adjust and Balance 

VA 

Department of Veterans Affairs 

VAMC 

VA Medical Center 

VA CFM 

VA Office of Construction and Facilities Management 

VACO 

VA Central Office 

VA PM 

VA Project Manager 

VA-RE 

VA COR 

USGBC 

United States Green Building Council 



 

1.6 DEFINITIONS 

 Acceptance Phase Commissioning: Commissioning tasks executed after most 
construction has been completed, most Site Observations and Static 
Tests have been completed and Pre-Functional Testing has been completed 
and accepted. The main commissioning activities performed during this 


phase are verification that the installed systems are functional by 
conducting Systems Functional Performance tests and Owner Training. 

 Accuracy: The capability of an instrument to indicate the true value of 
a measured quantity. 

 Back Check: A back check is a verification that an agreed upon 
solution to a design comment has been adequately addressed in a 
subsequent design review 

 Basis of Design (BOD): The Engineer’s Basis of Design is comprised of 
two components: the Design Criteria and the Design Narrative, these 
documents record the concepts, calculations, decisions, and product 
selections used to meet the Owner’s Project Requirements (OPR) and to 
satisfy applicable regulatory requirements, standards, and guidelines. 

 Benchmarks: Benchmarks are the comparison of a building’s energy usage 
to other similar buildings and to the building itself. For example, 
ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager is a frequently used and nationally 
recognized building energy benchmarking tool. 

 Building Information Modeling (BIM): Building Information Modeling is 
a parametric database which allows a building to be designed and 
constructed virtually in 3D, and provides reports both in 2D views and 
as schedules. Building Systems Commissioning (BSC): NEBB acronym used 
to designate its commissioning program. 

 Calibrate: The act of comparing an instrument of unknown accuracy with 
a standard of known accuracy to detect, correlate, report, or eliminate 
by adjustment any variation in the accuracy of the tested instrument. 

 CCTV: Closed circuit Television. Normally used for security 
surveillance and alarm detections as part of a special electrical 
security system. 

 COBie: Construction Operations Building Information Exchange (COBie) 
is an electronic industry data format used to transfer information 
developed during design, construction, and commissioning into the 
Engineering Control Center used to operate facilities. See the Whole 
Building Design Guide website for further information 
(http://www.wbdg.org/resources/cobie.php) 

 Commissionability: Defines a design component or construction process 
that has the necessary elements that will allow a system or component 
to be effectively measured, tested, operated and commissioned 

 Commissioning Agent (CxA): The qualified Commissioning Professional who 
administers the Cx process by managing the Cx team and overseeing the 


Commissioning Process. Where CxA is used in this specification it means 
the Commissioning Agent, members of his staff or appointed members of 
the commissioning team. Note that LEED uses the term Commissioning 
Authority in lieu of Commissioning Agent. 

 Commissioning Checklists: Lists of data or inspections to be verified 
to ensure proper system or component installation, operation, and 
function. Verification checklists are developed and used during all 
phases of the commissioning process to verify that the Owner’s Project 
Requirements (OPR) is being achieved. 

 Commissioning Design Review: The commissioning design review is a 
collaborative review of the design professionals design documents for 
items pertaining to the following: owner’s project requirements; basis 
of design; operability and maintainability (O&M) including 
documentation; functionality; training; energy efficiency, control 
systems’ sequence of operations including building automation system 
features; commissioning specifications and the ability to functionally 
test the systems. 

 Commissioning Issue: A condition identified by the Commissioning Agent 
or other member of the Commissioning Team that adversely affects the 
commissionability, operability, maintainability, or functionality of a 
system, equipment, or component. A condition that is in conflict with 
the Contract Documents and/or performance requirements of the installed 
systems and components. (See also – Commissioning Observation). 

 Commissioning Manager (CxM): A qualified individual appointed by the 
Contractor to manage the commissioning process on behalf of the 
Contractor. 

 Commissioning Observation: An issue identified by the Commissioning 
Agent or other member of the Commissioning Team that does not conform 
to the project OPR, contract documents or standard industry best 
practices. (See also Commissioning Issue) 

 Commissioning Plan: A document that outlines the commissioning process, 
commissioning scope and defines responsibilities, processes, schedules, 
and the documentation requirements of the Commissioning Process. 

 Commissioning Process: A quality focused process for enhancing the 
delivery of a project. The process focuses upon verifying and 
documenting that the facility and all of its systems, components, and 
assemblies are planned, designed, installed, tested, can be operated, 
and maintained to meet the Owner's Project Requirements. 


 Commissioning Report: The final commissioning document which presents 
the commissioning process results for the project. Cx reports include 
an executive summary, the commissioning plan, issue log, 
correspondence, and all appropriate check sheets and test forms. 

 Commissioning Representative (CxR): An individual appointed by a subcontractor 
to manage the commissioning process on behalf of the subcontractor. 


 Commissioning Specifications: The contract documents that detail the 
objective, scope and implementation of the commissioning process as 
developed in the Commissioning Plan. 

 Commissioning Team: Individual team members whose coordinated actions 
are responsible for implementing the Commissioning Process. 

 Construction Phase Commissioning: All commissioning efforts executed 
during the construction process after the design phase and prior to the 
Acceptance Phase Commissioning. 

 Contract Documents (CD): Contract documents include design and 
construction contracts, price agreements and procedure agreements. 
Contract Documents also include all final and complete drawings, 
specifications and all applicable contract modifications or 
supplements. 

 Construction Phase Commissioning (CPC): All commissioning efforts 
executed during the construction process after the design phase and 
prior to the Acceptance Phase Commissioning. 

 Coordination Drawings: Drawings showing the work of all trades that are 
used to illustrate that equipment can be installed in the space 
allocated without compromising equipment function or access for 
maintenance and replacement. These drawings graphically illustrate and 
dimension manufacturers’ recommended maintenance clearances. On 
mechanical projects, coordination drawings include structural steel, 
ductwork, major piping and electrical conduit and show the elevations 
and locations of the above components. 

 Data Logging: The monitoring and recording of temperature, flow, 
current, status, pressure, etc. of equipment using stand-alone data 
recorders. 

 Deferred System Test: Tests that cannot be completed at the end of the 
acceptance phase due to ambient conditions, schedule issues or other 
conditions preventing testing during the normal acceptance testing 
period. 


 Deficiency: See “Commissioning Issue”. 

 Design Criteria: A listing of the VA Design Criteria outlining the 
project design requirements, including its source. These are used 
during the design process to show the design elements meet the OPR. 

 Design Intent: The overall term that includes the OPR and the BOD. It 
is a detailed explanation of the ideas, concepts, and criteria that are 
defined by the owner to be important. The design intent documents are 
utilized to provide a written record of these ideas, concepts and 
criteria. 

 Design Narrative: A written description of the proposed design 
solutions that satisfy the requirements of the OPR. 

 Design Phase Commissioning (DPC): All commissioning tasks executed 
during the design phase of the project. 

 Environmental Systems: Systems that use a combination of mechanical 
equipment, airflow, water flow and electrical energy to provide 
heating, ventilating, air conditioning, humidification, and 
dehumidification for the purpose of human comfort or process control of 
temperature and humidity. 

 Executive Summary: A section of the Commissioning report that reviews 
the general outcome of the project. It also includes any unresolved 
issues, recommendations for the resolution of unresolved issues and all 
deferred testing requirements. 

 Functionality: This defines a design component or construction process 
which will allow a system or component to operate or be constructed in 
a manner that will produce the required outcome of the OPR. 

 Functional Test Procedure (FTP): A written protocol that defines 
methods, steps, personnel, and acceptance criteria for tests conducted 
on components, equipment, assemblies, systems, and interfaces among 
systems. 

 Industry Accepted Best Practice: A design component or construction 
process that has achieved industry consensus for quality performance 
and functionality. Refer to the current edition of the NEBB Design 
Phase Commissioning Handbook for examples. 

 Installation Verification: Observations or inspections that confirm 
the system or component has been installed in accordance with the 
contract documents and to industry accepted best practices. 

 Integrated System Testing: Integrated Systems Testing procedures entail 
testing of multiple integrated systems performance to verify proper 


functional interface between systems. Typical Integrated Systems 
Testing includes verifying that building systems respond properly to 
loss of utility, transfer to emergency power sources, re-transfer from 
emergency power source to normal utility source; interface between HVAC 
controls and Fire Alarm systems for equipment shutdown; interface 
between Fire Alarm System and Security Access Control Systems to 
control access to spaces during fire alarm conditions; and other 
similar tests as determined for each specific project. 
Issues Log: A formal and ongoing record of problems or concerns – and 
their resolution – that have been raised by members of the 
Commissioning Team during the course of the Commissioning Process. 

 Lessons Learned Workshop: A workshop conducted to discuss and document 
project successes and identify opportunities for improvements for 
future projects. 

 Maintainability: A design component or construction process that will 
allow a system or component to be effectively maintained. This includes 
adequate room for access to adjust and repair the equipment. 
Maintainability also includes components that have readily obtainable 
repair parts or service. 

 Manual Test: Testing using hand-held instruments, immediate control 
system readouts or direct observation to verify performance (contrasted 
to analyzing monitored data taken over time to make the ‘observation’). 

 Owner’s Project Requirements (OPR): A written document that details the 
project requirements and the expectations of how the building and its 
systems will be used and operated. These include project goals, 
measurable performance criteria, cost considerations, benchmarks, 
success criteria, and supporting information. 

 Peer Review: A formal in-depth review separate from the commissioning 
review processes. The level of effort and intensity is much greater 
than a typical commissioning facilitation or extended commissioning 
review. The VA usually hires an independent third-party (called the 
IDIQ A/E) to conduct peer reviews. 

 Precision: The ability of an instrument to produce repeatable readings 
of the same quantity under the same conditions. The precision of an 
instrument refers to its ability to produce a tightly grouped set of 
values around the mean value of the measured quantity. 


 Pre-Design Phase Commissioning: Commissioning tasks performed prior to 
the commencement of design activities that includes project programming 
and the development of the commissioning process for the project 

 Pre-Functional Checklist (PFC): A form used by the contractor to 
verify that appropriate components are onsite, correctly installed, set 
up, calibrated, functional and ready for functional testing. 

 Pre-Functional Test (PFT): An inspection or test that is done before 
functional testing. PFT’s include installation verification and system 
and component start up tests. 

 Procedure or Protocol: A defined approach that outlines the execution 
of a sequence of work or operations. Procedures are used to produce 
repeatable and defined results. 

 Range: The upper and lower limits of an instrument’s ability to measure 
the value of a quantity for which the instrument is calibrated. 

 Resolution: This word has two meanings in the Cx Process. The first 
refers to the smallest change in a measured variable that an instrument 
can detect. The second refers to the implementation of actions that 
correct a tested or observed deficiency. 

 Site Observation Visit: On-site inspections and observations made by 
the Commissioning Agent for the purpose of verifying component, 
equipment, and system installation, to observe contractor testing, 
equipment start-up procedures, or other purposes. 

 Site Observation Reports (SO): Reports of site inspections and 
observations made by the Commissioning Agent. Observation reports are 
intended to provide early indication of an installation issue which 
will need correction or analysis. 

 Special System Inspections: Inspections required by a local code 
authority prior to occupancy and are not normally a part of the 
commissioning process. 

 Static Tests: Tests or inspections that validate a specified static 
condition such as pressure testing. Static tests may be specification 
or code initiated. 

 Start Up Tests: Tests that validate the component or system is ready 
for automatic operation in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
requirements. 

 Systems Manual: A system-focused composite document that includes all 
information required for the owners operators to operate the systems. 


 Test Procedure: A written protocol that defines methods, personnel, and 
expectations for tests conducted on components, equipment, assemblies, 
systems, and interfaces among systems. 

 Testing: The use of specialized and calibrated instruments to measure 
parameters such as: temperature, pressure, vapor flow, air flow, fluid 
flow, rotational speed, electrical characteristics, velocity, and other 
data in order to determine performance, operation, or function. 

 Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing (TAB): A systematic process or 
service applied to heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) 
systems and other environmental systems to achieve and document air and 
hydronic flow rates. The standards and procedures for providing these 
services are referred to as “Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing” and are 
described in the Procedural Standards for the Testing, Adjusting and 
Balancing of Environmental Systems, published by NEBB or AABC. 

 Thermal Scans: Thermographic pictures taken with an Infrared 
Thermographic Camera. Thermographic pictures show the relative 
temperatures of objects and surfaces and are used to identify leaks, 
thermal bridging, thermal intrusion, electrical overload conditions, 
moisture containment, and insulation failure. 

 Training Plan: A written document that details, in outline form the 
expectations of the operator training. Training agendas should include 
instruction on how to obtain service, operate, startup, shutdown and 
maintain all systems and components of the project. 

 Trending: Monitoring over a period of time with the building 
automation system. 

 Unresolved Commissioning Issue: Any Commissioning Issue that, at the 
time that the Final Report or the Amended Final Report is issued that 
has not been either resolved by the construction team or accepted by 
the VA. Validation: The process by which work is verified as complete 
and operating correctly: 

1. First party validation occurs when a firm or individual verifying 
the task is the same firm or individual performing the task. 

2. Second party validation occurs when the firm or individual verifying 
the task is under the control of the firm performing the task or has 
other possibilities of financial conflicts of interest in the 
resolution (Architects, Designers, General Contractors and Third 
Tier Subcontractors or Vendors). 


3. Third party validation occurs when the firm verifying the task is 
not associated with or under control of the firm performing or 
designing the task. 

 Verification: The process by which specific documents, components, 
equipment, assemblies, systems, and interfaces among systems are 
confirmed to comply with the criteria described in the Owner’s Project 
Requirements. 

 Warranty Phase Commissioning: Commissioning efforts executed after a 
project has been completed and accepted by the Owner. Warranty Phase 
Commissioning includes follow-up on verification of system performance, 
measurement and verification tasks and assistance in identifying 
warranty issues and enforcing warranty provisions of the construction 
contract. 

 Warranty Visit: A commissioning meeting and site review where all 
outstanding warranty issues and deferred testing is reviewed and 
discussed. 

 Whole Building Commissioning: Commissioning of building systems such as 
Building Envelope, HVAC, Electrical, Special Electrical (Fire Alarm, 
Security & Communications), Plumbing and Fire Protection as described 
in this specification. 

1.7 SYSTEMS TO BE COMMISSIONED 

A. Commissioning of a system or systems specified for this project is part 
of the construction process. Documentation and testing of these 
systems, as well as training of the VA’s Operation and Maintenance 
personnel, is required in cooperation with the VA and the Commissioning 
Agent. 

 

B. The following systems will be commissioned as part of this project: 

 

Systems To Be Commissioned 

System 

Description 

Specialties 

Patient Bed Service 
Walls 

Medical gas certification and cross check, 
electrical connections 

Fire Suppression 

Fire Sprinkler Systems 

Wet pipe system 

Plumbing 




Systems To Be Commissioned 



System 

Description 

Medical Air Systems 

Packaged medical air compressor units. Outlet 
certification, cross-connection verification 

Medical Vacuum Systems 

Packaged medical vacuum units, outlet 
certification, cross-connection verification 

Waste Anesthesia Gas 
Systems 

Packaged Waste Anesthesia Gas units, outlet 
certification, cross-connection verification 

Medical Gas Systems 
(other than Medical 
Air Systems) 

Medical gas (oxygen, nitrogen, nitrous oxide, 
etc.) tank/manifold systems, outlet 
certification, cross-connection verification 

HVAC 

Noise and Vibration 
Control 

Noise and vibration levels for critical 
equipment such as Air Handlers, Air Terminal 
Units, Ductwork, Piping etc. be commissioned 
as part of the system commissioning 

Direct Digital Control 
System** 

Network Communications Modules and Wiring, 
Integration Panels. [DDC Control panels will 
be commissioned with the systems controlled by 
the panel] 

Chilled Water System** 

Limited to Piping, valves and controls 
associated with new Air Handling Equipment, 
and its interface with facility DDC system 

Steam/Heating Hot 
Water System** 

Limited to Piping, valves and controls 
associated with new Air Handling Equipment, 
VAV reheat coils, and their associated 
interface(s) with facility DDC system 

HVAC Air Handling 
Systems** 

Rooftop AHU, associated components and 
controls through entire sequence of operations 

HVAC 
Ventilation/Exhaust 
Systems 

General exhaust, toilet exhaust, isolation 
exhaust, room pressurization control systems 

HVAC Energy Recovery 
Systems** 

AHU Integrated Heat Recovery 

HVAC Terminal Unit 
Systems** 

VAV Terminal Units, CAV terminal units, and 
electric unit heaters 




Systems To Be Commissioned 



System 

Description 

Hydronic Distribution 
Systems 

Piping, valves and controls 

Electrical 

Low-Voltage 
Distribution System 

Normal power distribution system, Life-safety 
power distribution system, critical power 
distribution system, equipment power 
distribution system, switchboards, 
distribution panels, panelboards, verify 
breaker testing results (injection current, 
etc) 

Lighting & Lighting 
Control** Systems 

Emergency lighting, occupancy sensors, 
lighting control systems, architectural 
dimming systems, exterior lighting and 
controls 

 

 

Communications 

Grounding & Bonding 
System 

Witness 3rd party testing, review reports 

Structured Cabling 
System 

Witness 3rd party testing, review reports 

Master Antenna 
Television System 

Witness 3rd party testing, review reports 

Public Address & Mass 
Notification Systems 

Witness 3rd party testing, review reports 

Intercom & Program 
Systems 

Witness 3rd party testing, review reports 

Nurse Call & Code Blue 
Systems 

Witness 3rd party testing, review reports 

Security Emergency 
Call Systems 

Witness 3rd party testing, review reports 

Duress Alarm Systems 

Witness 3rd party testing, review reports 

Electronic Safety and Security 

Grounding & Bonding 

Witness 3rd party testing, review reports 

Video Surveillance 
System 

Witness 3rd party testing, review reports 




Systems To Be Commissioned 



System 

Description 

Fire Detection and 
Alarm System 

100% device acceptance testing, battery drawdown 
test, verify system monitoring, verify 
interface with other systems. 

 

 

 

 

Integrated Systems Tests 

Fire Alarm Response 

Integrated System Response to Fire Alarm 
Condition and Return to Normal 

Table Notes 

** Denotes systems that LEED requires to be commissioned to comply 
with the LEED Fundamental Commissioning pre-requisite. 



 

1.8 COMMISSIONING TEAM 

A. The commissioning team shall consist of, but not be limited to, 
representatives of Contractor, including Project Superintendent and 
subcontractors, installers, schedulers, suppliers, and specialists 
deemed appropriate by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and 
Commissioning Agent. 

B. Members Appointed by Contractor: 

1. Contractor’ Commissioning Manager: The designated person, company, 
or entity that plans, schedules and coordinates the commissioning 
activities for the construction team. 

2. Contractor’s Commissioning Representative(s): Individual(s), each 
having authority to act on behalf of the entity he or she 
represents, explicitly organized to implement the commissioning 
process through coordinated actions. 

C. Members Appointed by VA: 

1. Commissioning Agent: The designated person, company, or entity that 
plans, schedules, and coordinates the commissioning team to 
implement the commissioning process. The VA will engage the CxA 
under a separate contract. 

2. User: Representatives of the facility user and operation and 
maintenance personnel. 

3. A/E: Representative of the Architect and engineering design 
professionals. 


1.9 VA'S COMMISSIONING RESPONSIBILITIES 

A. Appoint an individual, company or firm to act as the Commissioning 
Agent. 

B. Assign operation and maintenance personnel and schedule them to 
participate in commissioning team activities including, but not limited 
to, the following: 

1. Coordination meetings. 

2. Training in operation and maintenance of systems, subsystems, and 
equipment. 

3. Testing meetings. 

4. Witness and assist in Systems Functional Performance Testing. 

5. Demonstration of operation of systems, subsystems, and equipment. 

C. Provide the Construction Documents, prepared by Architect and approved 
by VA, to the Commissioning Agent and for use in managing the 
commissioning process, developing the commissioning plan, systems 
manuals, and reviewing the operation and maintenance training plan. 

1.10 CONTRACTOR'S COMMISSIONING RESPONSIBILITIES 

A. The Contractor shall assign a Commissioning Manager to manage 
commissioning activities of the Contractor, and subcontractors. 

B. The Contractor shall ensure that the commissioning responsibilities 
outlined in these specifications are included in all subcontracts and 
that subcontractors comply with the requirements of these 
specifications. 

C. The Contractor shall ensure that each installing subcontractor shall 
assign representatives with expertise and authority to act on behalf of 
the subcontractor and schedule them to participate in and perform 
commissioning team activities including, but not limited to, the 
following: 

1. Participate in commissioning coordination meetings. 

2. Conduct operation and maintenance training sessions in accordance 
with approved training plans. 

3. Verify that Work is complete and systems are operational according 
to the Contract Documents, including calibration of instrumentation 
and controls. 

4. Evaluate commissioning issues and commissioning observations 
identified in the Commissioning Issues Log, field reports, test 
reports or other commissioning documents. In collaboration with 


entity responsible for system and equipment installation, recommend 
corrective action. 

5. Review and comment on commissioning documentation. 

6. Participate in meetings to coordinate Systems Functional Performance 
Testing. 

7. Provide schedule for operation and maintenance data submittals, 
equipment startup, and testing to Commissioning Agent for 
incorporation into the commissioning plan. 

8. Provide information to the Commissioning Agent for developing 
commissioning plan. 

9. Participate in training sessions for VA's operation and maintenance 
personnel. 

10. Provide technicians who are familiar with the construction and 
operation of installed systems and who shall develop specific test 
procedures to conduct Systems Functional Performance Testing of 
installed systems. 

1.11 COMMISSIONING AGENT’S RESPONSIBILITIES 

A. Organize and lead the commissioning team. 

B. Prepare the commissioning plan. See Paragraph 1.11-A of this 
specification Section for further information. 

C. Review and comment on selected submittals from the Contractor for 
general conformance with the Construction Documents. Review and 
comment on the ability to test and operate the system and/or equipment, 
including providing gages, controls and other components required to 
operate, maintain, and test the system. Review and comment on 
performance expectations of systems and equipment and interfaces 
between systems relating to the Construction Documents. 

D. At the beginning of the construction phase, conduct an initial 
construction phase coordination meeting for the purpose of reviewing 
the commissioning activities and establishing tentative schedules for 
operation and maintenance submittals; operation and maintenance 
training sessions; TAB Work; Pre-Functional Checklists, Systems 
Functional Performance Testing; and project completion. 

E. Convene commissioning team meetings for the purpose of coordination, 
communication, and conflict resolution; discuss status of the 
commissioning processes. Responsibilities include arranging for 
facilities, preparing agenda and attendance lists, and notifying 
participants. The Commissioning Agent shall prepare and distribute 


minutes to commissioning team members and attendees within five 
workdays of the commissioning meeting. 

F. Observe construction and report progress, observations and issues. 
Observe systems and equipment installation for adequate accessibility 
for maintenance and component replacement or repair, and for general 
conformance with the Construction Documents. 

G. Prepare Project specific Pre-Functional Checklists and Systems 
Functional Performance Test procedures. 

H. Coordinate Systems Functional Performance Testing schedule with the 
Contractor. 

I. Witness selected systems startups. 

J. Verify selected Pre-Functional Checklists completed and submitted by 
the Contractor. 

K. Witness and document Systems Functional Performance Testing. 

L. Compile test data, inspection reports, and certificates and include 
them in the systems manual and commissioning report. 

M. Review and comment on operation and maintenance (O&M) documentation and 
systems manual outline for compliance with the Contract Documents. 
Operation and maintenance documentation requirements are specified in 
Paragraph 1.25, Section 01 00 00 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

N. Review operation and maintenance training program developed by the 
Contractor. Verify training plans provide qualified instructors to 
conduct operation and maintenance training. 

O. Prepare commissioning Field Observation Reports. 

P. Prepare the Final Commissioning Report. 

Q. Return to the site at 10 months into the 12 month warranty period and 
review with facility staff the current building operation and the 
condition of outstanding issues related to the original and seasonal 
Systems Functional Performance Testing. Also interview facility staff 
and identify problems or concerns they have operating the building as 
originally intended. Make suggestions for improvements and for 
recording these changes in the O&M manuals. Identify areas that may 
come under warranty or under the original construction contract. Assist 
facility staff in developing reports, documents and requests for 
services to remedy outstanding problems. 

R. Assemble the final commissioning documentation, including the Final 
Commissioning Report and Addendum to the Final Commissioning Report. 


1.12 COMMISSIONING DOCUMENTATION 

A. Commissioning Plan: A document, prepared by Commissioning Agent,that 
outlines the schedule, allocation of resources, and documentation 
requirements of the commissioning process, and shall include, but is 
not limited, to the following: 

1. Plan for delivery and review of submittals, systems manuals, and 
other documents and reports. Identification of the relationship of 
these documents to other functions and a detailed description of 
submittals that are required to support the commissioning processes. 
Submittal dates shall include the latest date approved submittals 
must be received without adversely affecting commissioning plan. 

2. Description of the organization, layout, and content of 
commissioning documentation (including systems manual) and a 
detailed description of documents to be provided along with 
identification of responsible parties. 

3. Identification of systems and equipment to be commissioned. 

4. Schedule of Commissioning Coordination meetings. 

5. Identification of items that must be completed before the next 
operation can proceed. 

6. Description of responsibilities of commissioning team members. 

7. Description of observations to be made. 

8. Description of requirements for operation and maintenance training. 

9. Schedule for commissioning activities with dates coordinated with 
overall construction schedule. 

10. Process and schedule for documenting changes on a continuous basis 
to appear in Project Record Documents. 

11. Process and schedule for completing prestart and startup checklists 
for systems, subsystems, and equipment to be verified and tested. 

12. Preliminary Systems Functional Performance Test procedures. 

B. Systems Functional Performance Test Procedures: The Commissioning 
Agent will develop Systems Functional Performance Test Procedures for 
each system to be commissioned, including subsystems, or equipment and 
interfaces or interlocks with other systems. Systems Functional 
Performance Test Procedures will include a separate entry, with space 
for comments, for each item to be tested. Preliminary Systems 
Functional Performance Test Procedures will be provided to the VA, 
Architect/Engineer, and Contractor for review and comment. The Systems 
Performance Test Procedure will include test procedures for each mode 


of operation and provide space to indicate whether the mode under test 
responded as required. Each System Functional Performance Test 
procedure, regardless of system, subsystem, or equipment being tested, 
shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 

1. Name and identification code of tested system. 

2. Test number. 

3. Time and date of test. 

4. Indication of whether the record is for a first test or retest 
following correction of a problem or issue. 

5. Dated signatures of the person performing test and of the witness, 
if applicable. 

6. Individuals present for test. 

7. Observations and Issues. 

8. Issue number, if any, generated as the result of test. 

C. Pre-Functional Checklists: The Commissioning Agent will prepare Pre- 
Functional Checklists. Pre-Functional Checklists shall be completed 
and signed by the Contractor, verifying that systems, subsystems, 
equipment, and associated controls are ready for testing. The 
Commissioning Agent will spot check Pre-Functional Checklists to verify 
accuracy and readiness for testing. Inaccurate or incomplete Pre- 
Functional Checklists shall be returned to the Contractor for 
correction and resubmission. 

D. Test and Inspection Reports: The Commissioning Agent will record test 
data, observations, and measurements on Systems Functional Performance 
Test Procedure. The report will also include recommendation for system 
acceptance or non-acceptance. Photographs, forms, and other means 
appropriate for the application shall be included with data. 
Commissioning Agent Will compile test and inspection reports and test 
and inspection certificates and include them in systems manual and 
commissioning report. 

E. Corrective Action Documents: The Commissioning Agent will document 
corrective action taken for systems and equipment that fail tests. The 
documentation will include any required modifications to systems and 
equipment and/or revisions to test procedures, if any. The 
Commissioning Agent will witness and document any retesting of systems 
and/or equipment requiring corrective action and document retest 
results. 


F. Commissioning Issues Log: The Commissioning Agent will prepare and 
maintain Commissioning Issues Log that describes Commissioning Issues 
and Commissioning Observations that are identified during the 
Commissioning process. These observations and issues include, but are 
not limited to, those that are at variance with the Contract Documents. 
The Commissioning Issues Log will identify and track issues as they are 
encountered, the party responsible for resolution, progress toward 
resolution, and document how the issue was resolved. The Master 
Commissioning Issues Log will also track the status of unresolved 
issues. 

1. Creating an Commissioning Issues Log Entry: 

a. Identify the issue with unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier 
by which the issue may be tracked. 

b. Assign a descriptive title for the issue. 

c. Identify date and time of the issue. 

d. Identify test number of test being performed at the time of the 
observation, if applicable, for cross reference. 

e. Identify system, subsystem, and equipment to which the issue 
applies. 

f. Identify location of system, subsystem, and equipment. 

g. Include information that may be helpful in diagnosing or 
evaluating the issue. 

h. Note recommended corrective action. 

i. Identify commissioning team member responsible for corrective 
action. 

j. Identify expected date of correction. 

k. Identify person that identified the issue. 

2. Documenting Issue Resolution: 

a. Log date correction is completed or the issue is resolved. 

b. Describe corrective action or resolution taken. Include 
description of diagnostic steps taken to determine root cause of 
the issue, if any. 

c. Identify changes to the Contract Documents that may require 
action. 

d. State that correction was completed and system, subsystem, and 
equipment are ready for retest, if applicable. 

e. Identify person(s) who corrected or resolved the issue. 

f. Identify person(s) verifying the issue resolution. 


G. Final Commissioning Report: The Commissioning Agent will document 
results of the commissioning process, including unresolved issues, and 
performance of systems, subsystems, and equipment. The Commissioning 
Report will indicate whether systems, subsystems, and equipment have 
been properly installed and are performing according to the Contract 
Documents. This report will be used by the Department of Veterans 
Affairs when determining that systems will be accepted. This report 
will be used to evaluate systems, subsystems, and equipment and will 
serve as a future reference document during VA occupancy and operation. 
It shall describe components and performance that exceed requirements 
of the Contract Documents and those that do not meet requirements of 
the Contract Documents. The commissioning report will include, but is 
not limited to, the following: 

1. Lists and explanations of substitutions; compromises; variances with 
the Contract Documents; record of conditions; and, if appropriate, 
recommendations for resolution. Design Narrative documentation 
maintained by the Commissioning Agent. 

2. Commissioning plan. 

3. Pre-Functional Checklists completed by the Contractor, with 
annotation of the Commissioning Agent review and spot check. 

4. Systems Functional Performance Test Procedures, with annotation of 
test results and test completion. 

5, Commissioning Issues Log. 

6. Listing of deferred and off season test(s) not performed, including 
the schedule for their completion. 

H. Addendum to Final Commissioning Report: The Commissioning Agent will 
prepare an Addendum to the Final Commissioning Report near the end of 
the Warranty Period. The Addendum will indicate whether systems, 
subsystems, and equipment are complete and continue to perform 
according to the Contract Documents. The Addendum to the Final 
Commissioning Report shall include, but is not limited to, the 
following: 

1. Documentation of deferred and off season test(s) results. 

2. Completed Systems Functional Performance Test Procedures for off 
season test(s). 

3. Documentation that unresolved system performance issues have been 
resolved. 


4. Updated Commissioning Issues Log, including status of unresolved 
issues. 

5. Identification of potential Warranty Claims to be corrected by the 
Contractor. 

I. Systems Manual: The Commissioning Agent will gather required 
information and compile the Systems Manual. The Systems Manual will 
include, but is not limited to, the following: 

1. Design Narrative, including system narratives, schematics, singleline 
diagrams, flow diagrams, equipment schedules, and changes made 
throughout the Project. 

2. Reference to Final Commissioning Plan. 

3. Reference to Final Commissioning Report. 

4. Approved Operation and Maintenance Data as submitted by the 
Contractor. 

1.13 SUBMITTALS 

A. Preliminary Commissioning Plan Submittal: The Commissioning Agent has 
prepared a Preliminary Commissioning Plan based on the final 
Construction Documents. The Preliminary Commissioning Plan is included 
as an Appendix to this specification section. The Preliminary 
Commissioning Plan is provided for information only. It contains 
preliminary information about the following commissioning activities: 

1. The Commissioning Team: A list of commissioning team members by 
organization. 

2. Systems to be commissioned. A detailed list of systems to be 
commissioned for the project. This list also provides preliminary 
information on systems/equipment submittals to be reviewed by the 
Commissioning Agent; preliminary information on Pre-Functional 
Checklists that are to be completed; preliminary information on 
Systems Performance Testing, including information on testing sample 
size (where authorized by the VA). 

3. Commissioning Team Roles and Responsibilities: Preliminary roles and 
responsibilities for each Commissioning Team member. 

4. Commissioning Documents: A preliminary list of commissioning-related 
documents, include identification of the parties responsible for 
preparation, review, approval, and action on each document. 

5. Commissioning Activities Schedule: Identification of Commissioning 
Activities, including Systems Functional Testing, the expected 
duration and predecessors for the activity. 


6. Pre-Functional Checklists: Preliminary Pre-Functional Checklists 
for equipment, components, subsystems, and systems to be 
commissioned. These Preliminary Pre-Functional Checklists provide 
guidance on the level of detailed information the Contractor shall 
include on the final submission. 

7. Systems Functional Performance Test Procedures: Preliminary stepby-
step System Functional Performance Test Procedures to be used 
during Systems Functional Performance Testing. These Preliminary 
Systems Functional Performance procedures provide information on the 
level of testing rigor, and the level of Contractor support required 
during performance of system’s testing. 

B. Final Commissioning Plan Submittal: Based on the Final Construction 
Documents and the Contractor’s project team, the Commissioning Agent 
will prepare the Final Commissioning Plan as described in this section. 
The Commissioning Agent will submit three hard copies and three sets of 
electronic files of Final Commissioning Plan. The Contractor shall 
review the Commissioning Plan and provide any comments to the VA. The 
Commissioning Agent will incorporate review comments into the Final 
Commissioning Plan as directed by the VA. 

C. Systems Functional Performance Test Procedure: The Commissioning Agent 
will submit preliminary Systems Functional Performance Test Procedures 
to the Contractor, and the VA for review and comment. The Contractor 
shall return review comments to the VA and the Commissioning Agent. 
The VA will also return review comments to the Commissioning Agent. The 
Commissioning Agent will incorporate review comments into the Final 
Systems Functional Test Procedures to be used in Systems Functional 
Performance Testing. 

D. Pre-Functional Checklists: The Commissioning Agent will submit Pre- 
Functional Checklists to be completed by the Contractor. 

E. Test and Inspection Reports: The Commissioning Agent will submit test 
and inspection reports to the VA with copies to the Contractor and the 
Architect/Engineer. 

F. Corrective Action Documents: The Commissioning Agent will submit 
corrective action documents to the VA COR with copies to the Contractor 
and Architect. 

G. Preliminary Commissioning Report Submittal: The Commissioning Agent 
will submit three electronic copies of the preliminary commissioning 


report. One electronic copy, with review comments, will be returned to 
the Commissioning Agent for preparation of the final submittal. 

H. Final Commissioning Report Submittal: The Commissioning Agent will 
submit four sets of electronically formatted information of the final 
commissioning report to the VA. The final submittal will incorporate 
comments as directed by the VA. 

I. Data for Commissioning: 

1. The Commissioning Agent will request in writing from the Contractor 
specific information needed about each piece of commissioned 
equipment or system to fulfill requirements of the Commissioning 
Plan. 

2. The Commissioning Agent may request further documentation as is 
necessary for the commissioning process or to support other VA data 
collection requirements, including Construction Operations Building 
Information Exchange (COBIE), Building Information Modeling (BIM), 
etc. 

1.14 COMMISSIONING PROCESS 

A. The Commissioning Agent will be responsible for the overall management 
of the commissioning process as well as coordinating scheduling of 
commissioning tasks with the VA and the Contractor. As directed by the 
VA, the Contractor shall incorporate Commissioning tasks, including, 
but not limited to, Systems Functional Performance Testing (including 
predecessors) with the Master Construction Schedule. 

B. Within 7 days of contract award, the Contractor shall designate a 
specific individual as the Commissioning Manager (CxM) to manage and 
lead the commissioning effort on behalf of the Contractor. The 
Commissioning Manager shall be the single point of contact and 
communications for all commissioning related services by the 
Contractor. 

C. Within 14 days of contract award, the Contractor shall ensure that each 
subcontractor designates specific individuals as Commissioning 
Representatives (CXR) to be responsible for commissioning related 
tasks. The Contractor shall ensure the designated Commissioning 
Representatives participate in the commissioning process as team 
members providing commissioning testing services, equipment operation, 
adjustments, and corrections if necessary. The Contractor shall ensure 
that all Commissioning Representatives shall have sufficient authority 
to direct their respective staff to provide the services required, and 


to speak on behalf of their organizations in all commissioning related 
contractual matters. 

1.15 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Instructor Qualifications: Factory authorized service representatives 
shall be experienced in training, operation, and maintenance procedures 
for installed systems, subsystems, and equipment. 

B. Test Equipment Calibration: The Contractor shall comply with test 
equipment manufacturer's calibration procedures and intervals. 
Recalibrate test instruments immediately whenever instruments have been 
repaired following damage or dropping. Affix calibration tags to test 
instruments. Instruments shall have been calibrated within six months 
prior to use. 

1.16 COORDINATION 

A. Management: The Commissioning Agent will coordinate the commissioning 
activities with the VA and Contractor. The Commissioning Agent will 
submit commissioning documents and information to the VA. All 
commissioning team members shall work together to fulfill their 
contracted responsibilities and meet the objectives of the contract 
documents. 

B. Scheduling: The Contractor shall work with the Commissioning Agent and 
the VA to incorporate the commissioning activities into the 
construction schedule. The Commissioning Agent will provide sufficient 
information (including, but not limited to, tasks, durations and 
predecessors) on commissioning activities to allow the Contractor and 
the VA to schedule commissioning activities. All parties shall address 
scheduling issues and make necessary notifications in a timely manner 
in order to expedite the project and the commissioning process. The 
Contractor shall update the Master Construction as directed by the VA. 

C. Initial Schedule of Commissioning Events: The Commissioning Agent will 
provide the initial schedule of primary commissioning events in the 
Commissioning Plan and at the commissioning coordination meetings. The 
Commissioning Plan will provide a format for this schedule. As 
construction progresses, more detailed schedules will be developed by 
the Contractor with information from the Commissioning Agent. 

D. Commissioning Coordinating Meetings: The Commissioning Agent will 
conduct periodic Commissioning Coordination Meetings of the 
commissioning team to review status of commissioning activities, to 


discuss scheduling conflicts, and to discuss upcoming commissioning 
process activities. 

E. Pretesting Meetings: The Commissioning Agent will conduct pretest 
meetings of the commissioning team to review startup reports, Pre- 
Functional Checklist results, Systems Functional Performance Testing 
procedures, testing personnel and instrumentation requirements. 

F. Systems Functional Performance Testing Coordination: The Contractor 
shall coordinate testing activities to accommodate required quality 
assurance and control services with a minimum of delay and to avoid 
necessity of removing and replacing construction to accommodate testing 
and inspecting. The Contractor shall coordinate the schedule times for 
tests, inspections, obtaining samples, and similar activities. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 TEST EQUIPMENT 

A. The Contractor shall provide all standard and specialized testing 
equipment required to perform Systems Functional Performance Testing. 
Test equipment required for Systems Functional Performance Testing will 
be identified in the detailed System Functional Performance Test 
Procedure prepared by the Commissioning Agent. 

B. Data logging equipment and software required to test equipment shall be 
provided by the Contractor. 

C. All testing equipment shall be of sufficient quality and accuracy to 
test and/or measure system performance with the tolerances specified in 
the Specifications. If not otherwise noted, the following minimum 
requirements apply: Temperature sensors and digital thermometers shall 
have a certified calibration within the past year to an accuracy of 0.5 
oC (1.0 oF) and a resolution of + or - 0.1 oC (0.2 oF). Pressure sensors 
shall have an accuracy of + or - 2.0% of the value range being measured 
(not full range of meter) and have been calibrated within the last 
year. All equipment shall be calibrated according to the manufacturer's 
recommended intervals and following any repairs to the equipment. 
Calibration tags shall be affixed or certificates readily available. 

 


 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 COMMISSIONING PROCESS ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

A. The following table outlines the roles and responsibilities for the Commissioning Team members during 
the Construction Phase: 

 

Construction Phase 

CxA = Commissioning Agent 

COR = Contracting Officers 
Representative 

A/E = Design Arch/Engineer 

PC = Prime Contractor 

O&M = Gov’t Facility O&M 

L = Lead 

P = Participate 

A = Approve 

R = Review 

O = Optional 

Commissioning Roles & Responsibilities 

Category 

Task Description 

CxA 

COR 

A/E 

PC 

O&M 

Notes 

Meetings 

Construction Commissioning Kick Off 
meeting 

L 

A 

P 

P 

O 

 

Commissioning Meetings 

L 

A 

P 

P 

O 

 

Project Progress Meetings 

P 

A 

P 

L 

O 

 

Controls Meeting 

L 

A 

P 

P 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Coordination 

Coordinate with [OGC's, AHJ, Vendors, 
etc.] to ensure that Cx interacts 
properly with other systems as needed 
to support the OPR and BOD. 

L 

A 

P 

P 

N/A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cx Plan & Spec 

Final Commissioning Plan 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Schedules 

Duration Schedule for Commissioning 
Activities 

L 

A 

R 

R 

N/A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




Construction Phase 

CxA = Commissioning Agent 

COR = Contracting Officers 
Representative 

A/E = Design Arch/Engineer 

PC = Prime Contractor 

O&M = Gov’t Facility O&M 

L = Lead 

P = Participate 

A = Approve 

R = Review 

O = Optional 



Commissioning Roles & Responsibilities 



Category 

Task Description 

CxA 

COR 

A/E 

PC 

O&M 

Notes 

OPR and BOD 

Maintain OPR on behalf of Owner 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Maintain BOD/DID on behalf of Owner 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Document 
Reviews 

TAB Plan Review 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Submittal and Shop Drawing Review 

R 

A 

R 

L 

O 

 

Review Contractor Equipment Startup 
Checklists 

L 

A 

R 

R 

N/A 

 

Review Change Orders, ASI, and RFI 

L 

A 

R 

R 

N/A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Site 
Observations 

Witness Factory Testing 

P 

A 

P 

L 

O 

 

Construction Observation Site Visits 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Functional 
Test Protocols 

Final Pre-Functional Checklists 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Final Functional Performance Test 
Protocols 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Technical 
Activities 

Issues Resolution Meetings 

P 

A 

P 

L 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




Construction Phase 

CxA = Commissioning Agent 

COR = Contracting Officers 
Representative 

A/E = Design Arch/Engineer 

PC = Prime Contractor 

O&M = Gov’t Facility O&M 

L = Lead 

P = Participate 

A = Approve 

R = Review 

O = Optional 



Commissioning Roles & Responsibilities 



Category 

Task Description 

CxA 

COR 

A/E 

PC 

O&M 

Notes 

Reports and 
Logs 

Status Reports 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Maintain Commissioning Issues Log 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

B. The following table outlines the roles and responsibilities for the Commissioning Team members during 
the Acceptance Phase: 

 

Acceptance Phase 

CxA = Commissioning Agent 

COR = Contracting Officers 
Representative 

A/E = Design Arch/Engineer 

PC = Prime Contractor 

O&M = Gov’t Facility O&M 

L = Lead 

P = Participate 

A = Approve 

R = Review 

O = Optional 

Commissioning Roles & Responsibilities 

Category 

Task Description 

CxA 

COR 

A/E 

PC 

O&M 

Notes 

Meetings 

Commissioning Meetings 

L 

A 

P 

P 

O 

 

Project Progress Meetings 

P 

A 

P 

L 

O 

 

Pre-Test Coordination Meeting 

L 

A 

P 

P 

O 

 

Lessons Learned and Commissioning 
Report Review Meeting 

L 

A 

P 

P 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




Acceptance Phase 

CxA = Commissioning Agent 

COR = Contracting Officers 
Representative 

A/E = Design Arch/Engineer 

PC = Prime Contractor 

O&M = Gov’t Facility O&M 

L = Lead 

P = Participate 

A = Approve 

R = Review 

O = Optional 



Commissioning Roles & Responsibilities 



Category 

Task Description 

CxA 

COR 

A/E 

PC 

O&M 

Notes 

Coordination 

Coordinate with [OGC's, AHJ, Vendors, 
etc.] to ensure that Cx interacts 
properly with other systems as needed 
to support OPR and BOD 

L 

P 

P 

P 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cx Plan & Spec 

Maintain/Update Commissioning Plan 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Schedules 

Prepare Functional Test Schedule 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OPR and BOD 

Maintain OPR on behalf of Owner 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Maintain BOD/DID on behalf of Owner 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Document 
Reviews 

Review Completed Pre-Functional 
Checklists 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Pre-Functional Checklist Verification 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Review Operations & Maintenance Manuals 

L 

A 

R 

R 

R 

 

Training Plan Review 

L 

A 

R 

R 

R 

 

Warranty Review 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Review TAB Report 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Site 
Observations 

Construction Observation Site Visits 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Witness Selected Equipment Startup 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




Acceptance Phase 

CxA = Commissioning Agent 

COR = Contracting Officers 
Representative 

A/E = Design Arch/Engineer 

PC = Prime Contractor 

O&M = Gov’t Facility O&M 

L = Lead 

P = Participate 

A = Approve 

R = Review 

O = Optional 



Commissioning Roles & Responsibilities 



Category 

Task Description 

CxA 

COR 

A/E 

PC 

O&M 

Notes 

Functional 
Test Protocols 

TAB Verification 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Systems Functional Performance Testing 

L 

A 

P 

P 

P 

 

Retesting 

L 

A 

P 

P 

P 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Technical 
Activities 

Issues Resolution Meetings 

P 

A 

P 

L 

O 

 

Systems Training 

L 

S 

R 

P 

P 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reports and 
Logs 

Status Reports 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Maintain Commissioning Issues Log 

L 

A 

R 

R 

O 

 

Final Commissioning Report 

L 

A 

R 

R 

R 

 

Prepare Systems Manuals 

L 

A 

R 

R 

R 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

C. The following table outlines the roles and responsibilities for the Commissioning Team members during 
the Warranty Phase: 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

Warranty Phase 

CxA = Commissioning Agent 

COR = Contracting Officers 
Representative 

A/E = Design Arch/Engineer 

PC = Prime Contractor 

O&M = Gov’t Facility O&M 

L = Lead 

P = Participate 

A = Approve 

R = Review 

O = Optional 

Commissioning Roles & Responsibilities 

Category 

Task Description 

CxA 

COR 

A/E 

PC 

O&M 

Notes 

Meetings 

Post-Occupancy User Review Meeting 

L 

A 

O 

P 

P 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Site 
Observations 

Periodic Site Visits 

L 

A 

O 

O 

P 

 

Functional 
Test Protocols 

Deferred and/or seasonal Testing 

L 

A 

O 

P 

P 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Technical 
Activities 

Issues Resolution Meetings 

L 

S 

O 

O 

P 

 

 

Post-Occupancy Warranty Checkup and 
review of Significant Outstanding 
Issues 

L 

A 

 

R 

P 

 

Reports and 
Logs 

Final Commissioning Report Amendment 

L 

A 

 

R 

R 

 

Status Reports 

L 

A 

 

R 

R 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 


3.2 STARTUP, INITIAL CHECKOUT, AND PRE-FUNCTIONAL CHECKLISTS 

A. The following procedures shall apply to all equipment and systems to be 
commissioned, according to Part 1, Systems to Be Commissioned. 

1. Pre-Functional Checklists are important to ensure that the equipment 
and systems are hooked up and operational. These ensure that Systems 
Functional Performance Testing may proceed without unnecessary 
delays. Each system to be commissioned shall have a full Pre- 
Functional Checklist completed by the Contractor prior to Systems 
Functional Performance Testing. No sampling strategies are used. 

a. The Pre-Functional Checklist will identify the trades responsible 
for completing the checklist. The Contractor shall ensure the 
appropriate trades complete the checklists. 

b. The Commissioning Agent will review completed Pre-Functional 
Checklists and field-verify the accuracy of the completed 
checklist using sampling techniques. 

2. Startup and Initial Checkout Plan: The Contractor shall develop 
detailed startup plans for all equipment. The primary role of the 
Contractor in this process is to ensure that there is written 
documentation that each of the manufacturer recommended procedures 
have been completed. Parties responsible for startup shall be 
identified in the Startup Plan and in the checklist forms. 

a. The Contractor shall develop the full startup plan by combining 
(or adding to) the checklists with the manufacturer's detailed 
startup and checkout procedures from the O&M manual data and the 
field checkout sheets normally used by the Contractor. The plan 
shall include checklists and procedures with specific boxes or 
lines for recording and documenting the checking and inspections 
of each procedure and a summary statement with a signature block 
at the end of the plan. 

b. The full startup plan shall at a minimum consist of the following 
items: 

1) The Pre-Functional Checklists. 

2) The manufacturer's standard written startup procedures copied 
from the installation manuals with check boxes by each 
procedure and a signature block added by hand at the end. 

3) The manufacturer's normally used field checkout sheets. 

c. The Commissioning Agent will submit the full startup plan to the 
VA and Contractor for review. Final approval will be by the VA. 


d. The Contractor shall review and evaluate the procedures and the 
format for documenting them, noting any procedures that need to 
be revised or added. 

3. Sensor and Actuator Calibration 

a. All field installed temperature, relative humidity, CO2 and 
pressure sensors and gages, and all actuators (dampers and 
valves) on all equipment shall be calibrated using the methods 
described in Division 21, Division 22, Division 23, Division 26, 
Division 27, and Division 28 specifications. 

b. All procedures used shall be fully documented on the Pre- 
Functional Checklists or other suitable forms, clearly 
referencing the procedures followed and written documentation of 
initial, intermediate and final results. 

4. Execution of Equipment Startup 

a. Four weeks prior to equipment startup, the Contractor shall 
schedule startup and checkout with the VA and Commissioning 
Agent. The performance of the startup and checkout shall be 
directed and executed by the Contractor. 

b. The Commissioning Agent will observe the startup procedures for 
selected pieces of primary equipment. 

c. The Contractor shall execute startup and provide the VA and 
Commissioning Agent with a signed and dated copy of the completed 
startup checklists, and contractor tests. 

d. Only individuals that have direct knowledge and witnessed that a 
line item task on the Startup Checklist was actually performed 
shall initial or check that item off. It is not acceptable for 
witnessing supervisors to fill out these forms. 

3.3 DEFICIENCIES, NONCONFORMANCE, AND APPROVAL IN CHECKLISTS AND STARTUP 

A. The Contractor shall clearly list any outstanding items of the initial 
startup and Pre-Functional Checklist procedures that were not completed 
successfully, at the bottom of the procedures form or on an attached 
sheet. The procedures form and any outstanding deficiencies shall be 
provided to the VA and the Commissioning Agent within two days of 
completion. 

B. The Commissioning Agent will review the report and submit comments to 
the VA. The Commissioning Agent will work with the Contractor to 
correct and verify deficiencies or uncompleted items. The Commissioning 
Agent will involve the VA and others as necessary. The Contractor shall 


correct all areas that are noncompliant or incomplete in the checklists 
in a timely manner, and shall notify the VA and Commissioning Agent as 
soon as outstanding items have been corrected. The Contractor shall 
submit an updated startup report and a Statement of Correction on the 
original noncompliance report. When satisfactorily completed, the 
Commissioning Agent will recommend approval of the checklists and 
startup of each system to the VA. 

C. The Contractor shall be responsible for resolution of deficiencies as 
directed the VA. 

3.4 PHASED COMMISSIONING 

A. The project may require startup and initial checkout to be executed in 
phases. This phasing shall be planned and scheduled in a coordination 
meeting of the VA, Commissioning Agent, and the Contractor. Results 
will be added to the master construction schedule and the commissioning 
schedule. 

3.5 DDC SYSTEM TRENDING FOR COMMISSIONING 

A. Trending is a method of testing as a standalone method or to augment 
manual testing. The Contractor shall trend any and all points of the 
system or systems at intervals specified below. 

B. Alarms are a means to notify the system operator that abnormal 
conditions are present in the system. Alarms shall be structured into 
three tiers – Critical, Priority, and Maintenance. 

1. Critical alarms are intended to be alarms that require the immediate 
attention of and action by the Operator. These alarms shall be 
displayed on the Operator Workstation in a popup style window that 
is graphically linked to the associated unit's graphical display. 
The popup style window shall be displayed on top of any active 
window within the screen, including non DDC system software. 

2. Priority level alarms are to be printed to a printer which is 
connected to the Operator’s Work Station located within the 
engineer’s office. Additionally Priority level alarms shall be able 
to be monitored and viewed through an active alarm application. 
Priority level alarms are alarms which shall require reaction from 
the operator or maintenance personnel within a normal work shift, 
and not immediate action. 

3. Maintenance alarms are intended to be minor issues which would 
require examination by maintenance personnel within the following 
shift. These alarms shall be generated in a scheduled report 


automatically by the DDC system at the start of each shift. The 
generated maintenance report will be printed to a printer located 
within the engineer’s office. 

C. The Contractor shall provide a wireless internet network in the 
building for use during controls programming, checkout, and 
commissioning. This network will allow project team members to more 
effectively program, view, manipulate and test control devices while 
being in the same room as the controlled device. 

D. The Contractor shall provide graphical trending through the DDC control 
system of systems being commissioned. Trending requirements are 
indicated below and included with the Systems Functional Performance 
Test Procedures. Trending shall occur before, during and after Systems 
Functional Performance Testing. The Contractor shall be responsible for 
producing graphical representations of the trended DDC points that show 
each system operating properly during steady state conditions as well 
as during the System Functional Testing. These graphical reports shall 
be submitted to the COR and Commissioning Agent for review and analysis 
before, during dynamic operation, and after Systems Functional 
Performance Testing. The Contractor shall provide, but not limited to, 
the following trend requirements and trend submissions: 

1. Pre-testing, Testing, and Post-testing – Trend reports of trend logs 
and graphical trend plots are required as defined by the 
Commissioning Agent. The trend log points, sampling rate, graphical 
plot configuration, and duration will be dictated by the 
Commissioning Agent. At any time during the Commissioning Process 
the Commissioning Agent may recommend changes to aspects of trending 
as deemed necessary for proper system analysis. The Contractor shall 
implement any changes as directed by the COR. Any pre-test trend 
analysis comments generated by the Commissioning Team should be 
addressed and resolved by the Contractor, as directed by the COR, 
prior to the execution of Systems Functional Performance Testing. 

2. Dynamic plotting – The Contractor shall also provide dynamic 
plotting during Systems Functional Performance testing at frequent 
intervals for points determined by the Systems Functional 
Performance Test Procedure. The graphical plots will be formatted 
and plotted at durations listed in the Systems Functional 
Performance Test Procedure. 


3. Graphical plotting - The graphical plots shall be provided with a 
dual y-axis allowing 15 or more trend points (series) plotted 
simultaneously on the graph with each series in distinct color. The 
plots will further require title, axis naming, legend etc. all 
described by the Systems Functional Performance Test Procedure. If 
this cannot be sufficiently accomplished directly in the Direct 
Digital Control System then it is the responsibility of the 
Contractor to plot these trend logs in Microsoft Excel. 

4. The following tables indicate the points to be trended and alarmed 
by system. The Operational Trend Duration column indicates the 
trend duration for normal operations. The Testing Trend Duration 
column indicates the trend duration prior to Systems Functional 
Performance Testing and again after Systems Functional Performance 
Testing. The Type column indicates point type: AI = Analog Input, 
AO = Analog Output, DI = Digital Input, DO = Digital Output, Calc = 
Calculated Point. In the Trend Interval Column, COV = Change of 
Value. The Alarm Type indicates the alarm priority; C = Critical, P 
= Priority, and M = Maintenance. The Alarm Range column indicates 
when the point is considered in the alarm state. The Alarm Delay 
column indicates the length of time the point must remain in an 
alarm state before the alarm is recorded in the DDC. The intent is 
to allow minor, short-duration events to be corrected by the DDC 
system prior to recording an alarm. 

 

Dual-Path Air Handling Unit Trending and Alarms 

Point 

Type 

Trend 

Interval 

Operationa 
l Trend 

Duration 

Testing 
Trend 
Duration 

Alarm 
Type 

Alarm 
Range 

Alarm 
Delay 

OA 
Temperature 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

RA 
Temperature 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

RA Humidity 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

P 

>60% RH 

10 
min 

Mixed Air 
Temp 

AI 

None 

None 

None 

N/A 

 

 

SA Temp 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

C 

±5°F 
from SP 

10 
min 

Supply Fan 
Speed (For 
Fans 1,2,3 & 
4) 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 




Dual-Path Air Handling Unit Trending and Alarms 



Point 

Type 

Trend 

Interval 

Operationa 
l Trend 

Duration 

Testing 
Trend 
Duration 

Alarm 
Type 

Alarm 
Range 

Alarm 
Delay 

Exhaust Fan 
Speed (for 
fans 1,2,3 & 
4) 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

RA Pre-Filter 
Status 

AI 

None 

None 

None 

N/A 

 

 

OA Pre-Filter 
Status 

AI 

None 

None 

None 

N/A 

 

 

After Filter 
Status 

AI 

None 

None 

None 

N/A 

 

 

SA Flow 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

C 

±10% 
from SP 

10 
min 

OA Supply 
Temp 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

P 

±5°F 
from SP 

10 
min 

RA Supply 
Temp 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

RA CHW Valve 
Position 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

OA CHW Valve 
Position 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

OA HW Valve 
Position 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

OA Flow 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

P 

±10% 
from SP 

5 min 

RA Flow 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

P 

±10% 
from SP 

5 min 

Initial UVC 
Intensity (%) 

AI 

None 

None 

None 

N/A 

 

 

Duct Pressure 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

C 

±25% 
from SP 

6 min 

CO2 Level 

AI 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

P 

±10% 
from SP 

10 
min 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Supply Fan 
Status (for 
fans 1,2,3 & 
4) 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

C 

Status 
<> 
Command 

10 
min 

Exhaust Fan 
Status (for 
fans 1,2,3 & 
4) 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

C 

Status 
<> 
Command 

10 
Min 

High Static 
Status 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

P 

True 

1 min 

Fire Alarm 
Status 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

C 

True 

5 min 

Freeze Stat 
Level 1 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

C 

True 

10 
min 

Fire/Smoke 
Damper Status 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

P 

Closed 

1 min 




Dual-Path Air Handling Unit Trending and Alarms 



Point 

Type 

Trend 

Interval 

Operationa 
l Trend 

Duration 

Testing 
Trend 
Duration 

Alarm 
Type 

Alarm 
Range 

Alarm 
Delay 

Emergency AHU 
Shutdown 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

P 

True 

1 min 

OA Alarm 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

C 

True 

10 
min 

High Static 
Alarm 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

C 

True 

10 
min 

UVC Emitter 
Alarm 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

P 

True 

10 
min 

CO2 Alarm 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

P 

True 

10 
min 

Power Failure 

DI 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

P 

True 

1 min 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Supply Fan 
Speed 

AO 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

Return Fan 
Speed 

AO 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

RA CHW Valve 
Position 

AO 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

OA CHW Valve 
Position 

AO 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

OA HW Valve 
Position 

AO 

15 Min 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Supply Fan 
S/S 

DO 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

Exhaust Fan 
S/S 

DO 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

Fire/Smoke 
Dampers 

DO 

COV 

24 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AHU Energy 

Calc 

1 Hour 

30 day 

N/A 

N/A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

Terminal Unit (VAV, CAV, etc.) Trending and Alarms 

Point 

Type 

Trend 

Interval 

Operationa 
l Trend 

Duration 

Testing 
Trend 
Duration 

Alarm 
Type 

Alarm 
Range 

Alarm 
Delay 

Space 
Temperature 

AI 

15 Min 

12 hours 

3 days 

P 

±5°F 
from SP 

10 
min 

Air Flow 

AI 

15 Min 

12 hours 

3 days 

P 

±5°F 
from SP 

10 
min 

SA 
Temperature 

AI 

15 Min 

12 hours 

3 days 

P 

±5°F 
from SP 

10 
min 




Terminal Unit (VAV, CAV, etc.) Trending and Alarms 



Point 

Type 

Trend 

Interval 

Operationa 
l Trend 

Duration 

Testing 
Trend 
Duration 

Alarm 
Type 

Alarm 
Range 

Alarm 
Delay 

Local 
Setpoint 

AI 

15 Min 

12 hours 

3 days 

M 

±10°F 
from SP 

60 
min 

Space 
Humidity 

AI 

15 Min 

12 hours 

3 days 

P 

> 60% 
RH 

5 min 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Unoccupied 
Override 

DI 

COV 

12 hours 

3 days 

M 

N/A 

12 
Hours 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Damper 
Position 

AO 

15 
Minutes 

12 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

Heating coil 
Valve 
Position 

AO 

15 
Minutes 

12 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 



 

Unit Heater Trending and Alarms 

Point 

Type 

Trend 

Interval 

Operationa 
l Trend 

Duration 

Testing 
Trend 
Duration 

Alarm 
Type 

Alarm 
Range 

Alarm 
Delay 

Space 
Temperature 

AI 

15 
Minutes 

12 hours 

3 days 

P 

±5°F 
from SP 

10 
min 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Unit Heater 
ON/OFF 

DO 

COV 

12 hours 

3 days 

M 

Status 
<> 
Command 

30 
min 



 

 

Hydronic Hot Water Trending and Alarms 

Point 

Type 

Trend 

Interval 

Operationa 
l Trend 

Duration 

Testing 
Trend 
Duration 

Alarm 
Type 

Alarm 
Range 

Alarm 
Delay 

System HWS 
Temperature 

AI 

15 min 

12 hours 

3 days 

C 

±5°F 
from SP 

10 
Min 

System HWR 
Temperature 

AI 

15 min 

12 hours 

3 days 

M 

±15°F 
from SP 

300 
Min 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

System Flow 
(GPM) 

AI 

15 min 

12 hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

System 
Differential 
Pressure 

AI 

15 min 

12 hours 

3 days 

P 

±10% 
from SP 

8 Min 

 

 

 

 

3 days 

 

 

 




Hydronic Hot Water Trending and Alarms 



Point 

Type 

Trend 

Interval 

Operationa 
l Trend 

Duration 

Testing 
Trend 
Duration 

Alarm 
Type 

Alarm 
Range 

Alarm 
Delay 

Steam Coil 
Control Valve 
Position 

AO 

15 Min 

12 Hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

Steam Station 
Bypass Valve 
Position 

AO 

15 Min 

12 Hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

Chilled Water System Trending and Alarms 

Point 

Type 

Trend 

Interval 

Operationa 
l Trend 

Duration 

Testing 
Trend 
Duration 

Alarm 
Type 

Alarm 
Range 

Alarm 
Delay 

Chilled Water 
Coil Entering 
Temperature 

AI 

15 
Minutes 

12 Hours 

3 days 

N/A 

 

 

Chilled Water 
Coil Leaving 
Temperature 

AI 

15 
Minutes 

12 Hours 

3 days 

P 

±5°F 
from SP 

10 
Min 



 

E. The Contractor shall provide the following information prior to Systems 
Functional Performance Testing. Any documentation that is modified 
after submission shall be recorded and resubmitted to the COR and 
Commissioning Agent. 

1. Point-to-Point checkout documentation; 

2. Sensor field calibration documentation including system name, 
sensor/point name, measured value, DDC value, and Correction Factor. 

3. A sensor calibration table listing the referencing the location of 
procedures to following in the O&M manuals, and the frequency at 
which calibration should be performed for all sensors, separated by 
system, subsystem, and type. The calibration requirements shall be 
submitted both in the O&M manuals and separately in a standalone 
document containing all sensors for inclusion in the commissioning 
documentation. The following table is a sample that can be used as a 
template for submission. 

 

SYSTEM 

Sensor 

Calibration 

O&M Calibration Procedure 




Frequency 

Reference 

Discharge air 
temperature 

Once a year 

Volume I Section D.3.aa 

Discharge static 
pressure 

Every 6 months 

Volume II Section A.1.c 



 

 

4. Loop tuning documentation and constants for each loop of the 
building systems. The documentation shall be submitted in outline or 
table separated by system, control type (e.g. heating valve 
temperature control); proportional, integral and derivative 
constants, interval (and bias if used) for each loop. The following 
table is a sample that can be used as a template for submission. 

 

AIR HANDLING UNIT AHU-49 

Control 
Reference 

Proportional 
Constant 

Integral 
Constant 

Derivative 
Constant 

Interval 

Heating Valve 
Output 

1000 

20 

10 

2 sec. 



 

 

3.6 SYSTEMS FUNCTIONAL PERFORMANCE TESTING 

A. This paragraph applies to Systems Functional Performance Testing of 
systems for all referenced specification Divisions. 

B. Objectives and Scope: The objective of Systems Functional Performance 
Testing is to demonstrate that each system is operating according to 
the Contract Documents. Systems Functional Performance Testing 
facilitates bringing the systems from a state of substantial completion 
to full dynamic operation. Additionally, during the testing process, 
areas of noncompliant performance are identified and corrected, thereby 
improving the operation and functioning of the systems. In general, 
each system shall be operated through all modes of operation (seasonal, 
occupied, unoccupied, warm-up, cool-down, part- and full-load, fire 
alarm and emergency power) where there is a specified system response. 
The Contractor shall verify each sequence in the sequences of 
operation. Proper responses to such modes and conditions as power 
failure, freeze condition, low oil pressure, no flow, equipment 
failure, etc. shall also be tested. 

C. Development of Systems Functional Performance Test Procedures: Before 
Systems Functional Performance Test procedures are written, the 
Contractor shall submit all requested documentation and a current list 


of change orders affecting equipment or systems, including an updated 
points list, program code, control sequences and parameters. Using the 
testing parameters and requirements found in the Contract Documents and 
approved submittals and shop drawings, the Commissioning Agent will 
develop specific Systems Functional Test Procedures to verify and 
document proper operation of each piece of equipment and system to be 
commissioned. The Contractor shall assist the Commissioning Agent in 
developing the Systems Functional Performance Test procedures as 
requested by the Commissioning Agent i.e. by answering questions about 
equipment, operation, sequences, etc. Prior to execution, the 
Commissioning Agent will provide a copy of the Systems Functional 
Performance Test procedures to the VA, the Architect/Engineer, and the 
Contractor, who shall review the tests for feasibility, safety, 
equipment and warranty protection. 

D. Purpose of Test Procedures: The purpose of each specific Systems 
Functional Performance Test is to verify and document compliance with 
the stated criteria of acceptance given on the test form. 
Representative test formats and examples are found in the Commissioning 
Plan for this project. (The Commissioning Plan is issued as a separate 
document and is available for review.) The test procedure forms 
developed by the Commissioning Agent will include, but not be limited 
to, the following information: 

1. System and equipment or component name(s) 

2. Equipment location and ID number 

3. Unique test ID number, and reference to unique Pre-Functional 
Checklists and startup documentation, and ID numbers for the piece 
of equipment 

4. Date 

5. Project name 

6. Participating parties 

7. A copy of the specification section describing the test requirements 

8. A copy of the specific sequence of operations or other specified 
parameters being verified 

9. Formulas used in any calculations 

10. Required pretest field measurements 

11. Instructions for setting up the test. 

12. Special cautions, alarm limits, etc. 


13. Specific step-by-step procedures to execute the test, in a clear, 
sequential and repeatable format 

14. Acceptance criteria of proper performance with a Yes / No check box 
to allow for clearly marking whether or not proper performance of 
each part of the test was achieved. 

15. A section for comments. 

16. Signatures and date block for the Commissioning Agent. A place for 
the Contractor to initial to signify attendance at the test. 

E. Test Methods: Systems Functional Performance Testing shall be achieved 
by manual testing (i.e. persons manipulate the equipment and observe 
performance) and/or by monitoring the performance and analyzing the 
results using the control system's trend log capabilities or by 
standalone data loggers. The Contractor and Commissioning Agent shall 
determine which method is most appropriate for tests that do not have a 
method specified. 

1. Simulated Conditions: Simulating conditions (not by an overwritten 
value) shall be allowed, although timing the testing to experience 
actual conditions is encouraged wherever practical. 

2. Overwritten Values: Overwriting sensor values to simulate a 
condition, such as overwriting the outside air temperature reading 
in a control system to be something other than it really is, shall 
be allowed, but shall be used with caution and avoided when 
possible. Such testing methods often can only test a part of a 
system, as the interactions and responses of other systems will be 
erroneous or not applicable. Simulating a condition is preferable. 
e.g., for the above case, by heating the outside air sensor with a 
hair blower rather than overwriting the value or by altering the 
appropriate setpoint to see the desired response. Before simulating 
conditions or overwriting values, sensors, transducers and devices 
shall have been calibrated. 

3. Simulated Signals: Using a signal generator which creates a 
simulated signal to test and calibrate transducers and DDC constants 
is generally recommended over using the sensor to act as the signal 
generator via simulated conditions or overwritten values. 

4. Altering Setpoints: Rather than overwriting sensor values, and when 
simulating conditions is difficult, altering setpoints to test a 
sequence is acceptable. For example, to see the Air Conditioning 
compressor lockout initiate at an outside air temperature below 12 C 


(54 F), when the outside air temperature is above 12 C (54 F), 
temporarily change the lockout setpoint to be 2 C (4 F) above the 
current outside air temperature. 

5. Indirect Indicators: Relying on indirect indicators for responses 
or performance shall be allowed only after visually and directly 
verifying and documenting, over the range of the tested parameters, 
that the indirect readings through the control system represent 
actual conditions and responses. Much of this verification shall be 
completed during systems startup and initial checkout. 

F. Setup: Each function and test shall be performed under conditions that 
simulate actual conditions as closely as is practically possible. The 
Contractor shall provide all necessary materials, system modifications, 
etc. to produce the necessary flows, pressures, temperatures, etc. 
necessary to execute the test according to the specified conditions. At 
completion of the test, the Contractor shall return all affected 
building equipment and systems, due to these temporary modifications, 
to their pretest condition. 

G. Sampling: No sampling is allowed in completing Pre-Functional 
Checklists. Sampling is allowed for Systems Functional Performance 
Test Procedures execution. The Commissioning Agent will determine the 
sampling rate. If at any point, frequent failures are occurring and 
testing is becoming more troubleshooting than verification, the 
Commissioning Agent may stop the testing and require the Contractor to 
perform and document a checkout of the remaining units, prior to 
continuing with Systems Functional Performance Testing of the remaining 
units. 

H. Cost of Retesting: The cost associated with expanded sample System 
Functional Performance Tests shall be solely the responsibility of the 
Contractor. Any required retesting by the Contractor shall not be 
considered a justified reason for a claim of delay or for a time 
extension by the Contractor. 

I. Coordination and Scheduling: The Contractor shall provide a minimum of 
7 days’ notice to the Commissioning Agent and the VA regarding the 
completion schedule for the Pre-Functional Checklists and startup of 
all equipment and systems. The Commissioning Agent will schedule 
Systems Functional Performance Tests with the Contractor and VA. The 
Commissioning Agent will witness and document the Systems Functional 


Performance Testing of systems. The Contractor shall execute the tests 
in accordance with the Systems Functional Performance Test Procedure. 

J. Testing Prerequisites: In general, Systems Functional Performance 
Testing will be conducted only after Pre-Functional Checklists have 
been satisfactorily completed. The control system shall be sufficiently 
tested and approved by the Commissioning Agent and the VA before it is 
used to verify performance of other components or systems. The air 
balancing and water balancing shall be completed before Systems 
Functional Performance Testing of air-related or water-related 
equipment or systems are scheduled. Systems Functional Performance 
Testing will proceed from components to subsystems to systems. When the 
proper performance of all interacting individual systems has been 
achieved, the interface or coordinated responses between systems will 
be checked. 

K. Problem Solving: The Commissioning Agent will recommend solutions to 
problems found, however the burden of responsibility to solve, correct 
and retest problems is with the Contractor. 

3.7 DOCUMENTATION, NONCONFORMANCE AND APPROVAL OF TESTS 

A. Documentation: The Commissioning Agent will witness, and document the 
results of all Systems Functional Performance Tests using the specific 
procedural forms developed by the Commissioning Agent for that purpose. 
Prior to testing, the Commissioning Agent will provide these forms to 
the VA and the Contractor for review and approval. The Contractor shall 
include the filled out forms with the O&M manual data. 

B. Nonconformance: The Commissioning Agent will record the results of the 
Systems Functional Performance Tests on the procedure or test form. All 
items of nonconformance issues will be noted and reported to the VA on 
Commissioning Field Reports and/or the Commissioning Master Issues Log. 

1. Corrections of minor items of noncompliance identified may be made 
during the tests. In such cases, the item of noncompliance and 
resolution shall be documented on the Systems Functional Test 
Procedure. 

2. Every effort shall be made to expedite the systems functional 
Performance Testing process and minimize unnecessary delays, while 
not compromising the integrity of the procedures. However, the 
Commissioning Agent shall not be pressured into overlooking 
noncompliant work or loosening acceptance criteria to satisfy 


scheduling or cost issues, unless there is an overriding reason to 
do so by direction from the VA. 

3. As the Systems Functional Performance Tests progresses and an item 
of noncompliance is identified, the Commissioning Agent shall 
discuss the issue with the Contractor and the VA. 

4. When there is no dispute on an item of noncompliance, and the 
Contractor accepts responsibility to correct it: 

a. The Commissioning Agent will document the item of noncompliance 
and the Contractor's response and/or intentions. The Systems 
Functional Performance Test then continues or proceeds to another 
test or sequence. After the day's work is complete, the 
Commissioning Agent will submit a Commissioning Field Report to 
the VA. The Commissioning Agent will also note items of 
noncompliance and the Contractor’s response in the Master 
Commissioning Issues Log. The Contractor shall correct the item 
of noncompliance and report completion to the VA and the 
Commissioning Agent. 

b. The need for retesting will be determined by the Commissioning 
Agent. If retesting is required, the Commissioning Agent and the 
Contractor shall reschedule the test and the test shall be 
repeated. 

5. If there is a dispute about item of noncompliance, regarding whether 
it is an item of noncompliance, or who is responsible: 

a. The item of noncompliance shall be documented on the test form 
with the Contractor's response. The item of noncompliance with 
the Contractor’s response shall also be reported on a 
Commissioning Field Report and on the Master Commissioning Issues 
Log. 

b. Resolutions shall be made at the lowest management level 
possible. Other parties are brought into the discussions as 
needed. Final interpretive and acceptance authority is with the 
Department of Veterans Affairs. 

c. The Commissioning Agent will document the resolution process. 

d. Once the interpretation and resolution have been decided, the 
Contractor shall correct the item of noncompliance, report it to 
the Commissioning Agent. The requirement for retesting will be 
determined by the Commissioning Agent. If retesting is required, 
the Commissioning Agent and the Contractor shall reschedule the 


test. Retesting shall be repeated until satisfactory performance 
is achieved. 

C. Cost of Retesting: The cost to retest a System Functional Performance 
Test shall be solely the responsibility of the Contractor. Any 
required retesting by the Contractor shall not be considered a 
justified reason for a claim of delay or for a time extension by the 
Contractor. 

D. Failure Due to Manufacturer Defect: If 10%, or three, whichever is 
greater, of identical pieces (size alone does not constitute a 
difference) of equipment fail to perform in compliance with the 
Contract Documents (mechanically or substantively) due to manufacturing 
defect, not allowing it to meet its submitted performance 
specifications, all identical units may be considered unacceptable by 
the VA. In such case, the Contractor shall provide the VA with the 
following: 

1. Within one week of notification from the VA, the Contractor shall 
examine all other identical units making a record of the findings. 
The findings shall be provided to the VA within two weeks of the 
original notice. 

2. Within two weeks of the original notification, the Contractor shall 
provide a signed and dated, written explanation of the problem, 
cause of failures, etc. and all proposed solutions which shall 
include full equipment submittals. The proposed solutions shall not 
significantly exceed the specification requirements of the original 
installation. 

3. The VA shall determine whether a replacement of all identical units 
or a repair is acceptable. 

4. Two examples of the proposed solution shall be installed by the 
Contractor and the VA shall be allowed to test the installations for 
up to one week, upon which the VA will decide whether to accept the 
solution. 

5. Upon acceptance, the Contractor shall replace or repair all 
identical items, at their expense and extend the warranty 
accordingly, if the original equipment warranty had begun. The 
replacement/repair work shall proceed with reasonable speed 
beginning within one week from when parts can be obtained. 

E. Approval: The Commissioning Agent will note each satisfactorily 
demonstrated function on the test form. Formal approval of the Systems 


Functional Performance Test shall be made later after review by the 
Commissioning Agent and by the VA. The Commissioning Agent will 
evaluate each test and report to the VA using a standard form. The VA 
will give final approval on each test using the same form, and provide 
signed copies to the Commissioning Agent and the Contractor. 

3.8 DEFERRED TESTING 

A. Unforeseen Deferred Systems Functional Performance Tests: If any 
Systems Functional Performance Test cannot be completed due to the 
building structure, required occupancy condition or other conditions, 
execution of the Systems Functional Performance Testing may be delayed 
upon approval of the VA. These Systems Functional Performance Tests 
shall be conducted in the same manner as the seasonal tests as soon as 
possible. Services of the Contractor to conduct these unforeseen 
Deferred Systems Functional Performance Tests shall be negotiated 
between the VA and the Contractor. 

B. Deferred Seasonal Testing: Deferred Seasonal Systems Functional 
Performance Tests are those that must be deferred until weather 
conditions are closer to the systems design parameters. The 
Commissioning Agent will review systems parameters and recommend which 
Systems Functional Performance Tests should be deferred until weather 
conditions more closely match systems parameters. The Contractor shall 
review and comment on the proposed schedule for Deferred Seasonal 
Testing. The VA will review and approve the schedule for Deferred 
Seasonal Testing. Deferred Seasonal Systems Functional Performances 
Tests shall be witnessed and documented by the Commissioning Agent. 
Deferred Seasonal Systems Functional Performance Tests shall be 
executed by the Contractor in accordance with these specifications. 

3.9 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE TRAINING REQUIREMENTS 

A. Training Preparation Conference: Before operation and maintenance 
training, the Commissioning Agent will convene a training preparation 
conference to include VA's COR, VA’s Operations and Maintenance 
personnel, and the Contractor. The purpose of this conference will be 
to discuss and plan for Training and Demonstration of VA Operations and 
Maintenance personnel. 

B. The Contractor shall provide training and demonstration as required by 
other Division 21, Division 22, Division 23, Division 26, Division 27, 
and Division 28 sections. The Training and Demonstration shall 
include, but is not limited to, the following: 


1. Review the Contract Documents. 

2. Review installed systems, subsystems, and equipment. 

3. Review instructor qualifications. 

4. Review instructional methods and procedures. 

5. Review training module outlines and contents. 

6. Review course materials (including operation and maintenance 
manuals). 

7. Review and discuss locations and other facilities required for 
instruction. 

8. Review and finalize training schedule and verify availability of 
educational materials, instructors, audiovisual equipment, and 
facilities needed to avoid delays. 

9. For instruction that must occur outside, review weather and 
forecasted weather conditions and procedures to follow if conditions 
are unfavorable. 

C. Training Module Submittals: The Contractor shall submit the following 
information to the VA and the Commissioning Agent: 

1. Instruction Program: Submit two copies of outline of instructional 
program for demonstration and training, including a schedule of 
proposed dates, times, length of instruction time, and instructors' 
names for each training module. Include learning objective and 
outline for each training module. At completion of training, submit 
two complete training manuals for VA's use. 

2. Qualification Data: Submit qualifications for facilitator and/or 
instructor. 

3. Attendance Record: For each training module, submit list of 
participants and length of instruction time. 

4. Evaluations: For each participant and for each training module, 
submit results and documentation of performance-based test. 

5. Demonstration and Training Recording: 

a. General: Engage a qualified commercial photographer to record 
demonstration and training. Record each training module 
separately. Include classroom instructions and demonstrations, 
board diagrams, and other visual aids, but not student practice. 
At beginning of each training module, record each chart 
containing learning objective and lesson outline. 

b. Video Format: Provide high quality color DVD color on standard 
size DVD disks. 


c. Recording: Mount camera on tripod before starting recording, 
unless otherwise necessary to show area of demonstration and 
training. Display continuous running time. 

d. Narration: Describe scenes on video recording by audio narration 
by microphone while demonstration and training is recorded. 
Include description of items being viewed. Describe vantage 
point, indicating location, direction (by compass point), and 
elevation or story of construction. 

e. Submit two copies within seven days of end of each training 
module. 

6. Transcript: Prepared on 8-1/2-by-11-inch paper, punched and bound 
in heavy-duty, 3-ring, vinyl-covered binders. Mark appropriate 
identification on front and spine of each binder. Include a cover 
sheet with same label information as the corresponding videotape. 
Include name of Project and date of videotape on each page. 

D. Quality Assurance: 

1. Facilitator Qualifications: A firm or individual experienced in 
training or educating maintenance personnel in a training program 
similar in content and extent to that indicated for this Project, 
and whose work has resulted in training or education with a 
record of successful learning performance. 

2. Instructor Qualifications: A factory authorized service 
representative, complying with requirements in Division 01 
Section "Quality Requirements," experienced in operation and 
maintenance procedures and training. 

3. Photographer Qualifications: A professional photographer who is 
experienced photographing construction projects. 

E. Training Coordination: 

1. Coordinate instruction schedule with VA's operations. Adjust 
schedule as required to minimize disrupting VA's operations. 

2. Coordinate instructors, including providing notification of dates, 
times, length of instruction time, and course content. 

3. Coordinate content of training modules with content of approved 
emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. Do not submit 
instruction program until operation and maintenance data has been 
reviewed and approved by the VA. 

F. Instruction Program: 


1. Program Structure: Develop an instruction program that includes 
individual training modules for each system and equipment not part 
of a system, as required by individual Specification Sections, and 
as follows: 

a. Fire protection systems, including fire alarm and fire 
suppression systems. 

b. Medical equipment, including medical gas equipment and piping. 

c. Steam and heating hot water distribution piping and controls. 

g. Chilled water distribution piping and controls. 

h. HVAC systems, including air handling equipment, air distribution 
systems, and terminal equipment and devices. 

i. HVAC instrumentation and controls. 

j. Electrical service and distribution, including transformers, 
panel boards, and motor controls. 

l. Lighting equipment and controls. 

m. Communication systems, including intercommunication, 
surveillance, nurse call systems, public address, voice and data, 
and entertainment television equipment. 

G. Training Modules: Develop a learning objective and teaching outline 
for each module. Include a description of specific skills and 
knowledge that participants are expected to master. For each module, 
include instruction for the following: 

1. Basis of System Design, Operational Requirements, and Criteria: 
Include the following: 

a. System, subsystem, and equipment descriptions. 

b. Performance and design criteria if Contractor is delegated design 
responsibility. 

c. Operating standards. 

d. Regulatory requirements. 

e. Equipment function. 

f. Operating characteristics. 

g. Limiting conditions. 

H, Performance curves. 

2. Documentation: Review the following items in detail: 

a. Emergency manuals. 

b. Operations manuals. 

c. Maintenance manuals. 

d. Project Record Documents. 


e. Identification systems. 

f. Warranties and bonds. 

g. Maintenance service agreements and similar continuing 
commitments. 

3. Emergencies: Include the following, as applicable: 

a. Instructions on meaning of warnings, trouble indications, and 
error messages. 

b. Instructions on stopping. 

c. Shutdown instructions for each type of emergency. 

d. Operating instructions for conditions outside of normal operating 
limits. 

e. Sequences for electric or electronic systems. 

f. Special operating instructions and procedures. 

4. Operations: Include the following, as applicable: 

a. Startup procedures. 

b. Equipment or system break-in procedures. 

c. Routine and normal operating instructions. 

d. Regulation and control procedures. 

e. Control sequences. 

f. Safety procedures. 

g. Instructions on stopping. 

h. Normal shutdown instructions. 

i. Operating procedures for emergencies. 

j. Operating procedures for system, subsystem, or equipment failure. 

k. Seasonal and weekend operating instructions. 

l. Required sequences for electric or electronic systems. 

m. Special operating instructions and procedures. 

5. Adjustments: Include the following: 

a. Alignments. 

b. Checking adjustments. 

c. Noise and vibration adjustments. 

d. Economy and efficiency adjustments. 

6. Troubleshooting: Include the following: 

a. Diagnostic instructions. 

b. Test and inspection procedures. 

7. Maintenance: Include the following: 

a. Inspection procedures. 

b. Types of cleaning agents to be used and methods of cleaning. 


c. List of cleaning agents and methods of cleaning detrimental to 
product. 

d. Procedures for routine cleaning 

e. Procedures for preventive maintenance. 

f. Procedures for routine maintenance. 

g. Instruction on use of special tools. 

8. Repairs: Include the following: 

a. Diagnosis instructions. 

b. Repair instructions. 

c. Disassembly; component removal, repair, and replacement; and 
reassembly instructions. 

d. Instructions for identifying parts and components. 

e. Review of spare parts needed for operation and maintenance. 

H. Training Execution: 

1. Preparation: Assemble educational materials necessary for 
instruction, including documentation and training module. Assemble 
training modules into a combined training manual. Set up 
instructional equipment at instruction location. 

2. Instruction: 

a. Facilitator: Engage a qualified facilitator to prepare 
instruction program and training modules, to coordinate 
instructors, and to coordinate between Contractor and Department 
of Veterans Affairs for number of participants, instruction 
times, and location. 

b. Instructor: Engage qualified instructors to instruct VA's 
personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain systems, subsystems, 
and equipment not part of a system. 

1) The Commissioning Agent will furnish an instructor to describe 
basis of system design, operational requirements, criteria, 
and regulatory requirements. 

2) The VA will furnish an instructor to describe VA's operational 
philosophy. 

3) The VA will furnish the Contractor with names and positions of 
participants. 

3. Scheduling: Provide instruction at mutually agreed times. For 
equipment that requires seasonal operation, provide similar 
instruction at start of each season. Schedule training with the VA 


and the Commissioning Agent with at least seven days' advance 
notice. 

4. Evaluation: At conclusion of each training module, assess and 
document each participant's mastery of module by use of an oral, or 
a written, performance-based test. 

5. Cleanup: Collect used and leftover educational materials and remove 
from Project site. Remove instructional equipment. Restore systems 
and equipment to condition existing before initial training use. 

I. Demonstration and Training Recording: 

1. General: Engage a qualified commercial photographer to record 
demonstration and training. Record each training module separately. 
Include classroom instructions and demonstrations, board diagrams, 
and other visual aids, but not student practice. At beginning of 
each training module, record each chart containing learning 
objective and lesson outline. 

2. Video Format: Provide high quality color DVD color on standard size 
DVD disks. 

3. Recording: Mount camera on tripod before starting recording, unless 
otherwise necessary to show area of demonstration and training. 
Display continuous running time. 

4. Narration: Describe scenes on videotape by audio narration by 
microphone while demonstration and training is recorded. Include 
description of items being viewed. Describe vantage point, 
indicating location, direction (by compass point), and elevation or 
story of construction. 

----- END ----- 

 


SECTION 02 21 00 
SITE SURVEYS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies the gathering of research documents, performance 
of a property and topographic survey and preparation of a site survey 
map. 

1.2 DEFINITIONS 

A. Professional Land Surveyor: One who possesses a valid state license as 
a "Professional Land Surveyor" from the state in which they practice. 

B. Professional Civil Engineer: One who possesses a valid state license as 
a "Professional Civil Engineer" from the state in which they practice. 
For this section, the term "surveyor" shall also include Professional 
Civil Engineers authorized to practice Land Surveying under the laws of 
the state in which they practice. 

PART 2 - EXECUTION 

A. The surveyor shall research available public records for all mapping, 
monumentation, plats, governmental surveys etc. that may pertain to the 
subject property. Research all applicable public utilities for 
substructure data such as sewers, storm drains, water lines, electrical 
conduits etc. 

B. The survey shall be performed on the ground in accordance with the 
current "Accuracy Standards for Land Title Surveys" as adopted, from 
time to time, by the American Congress on Surveying and Mapping, the 
National Society of Professional Surveyors, and the American Land Title 
Association. 

C. The surveyor, when applicable, shall consult with the Contracting 
Officer to determine scale of plat or map and size of drawings. 

D. The surveyor shall furnish two sets of prints of the plat or map of 
survey and the electronic CADD file for 3D software. The sheets shall 
be numbered, the total number of sheets indicated and the match lines 
shall be shown on each sheet. 

E. On the plat or map, the survey boundary shall be drawn to a scale not 
larger than 1 inch = 30 feet (25 mm = 9 m), with the scale clearly 
indicated. A graphic scale, shown in feet or meters or both, shall be 
included. A north arrow shall be shown and when practicable, the plat 
or map of survey shall be oriented so that north is at the top of the 
drawing. Symbols or abbreviations used shall be identified on the face 


of the plat or map by use of a legend or other means. Supplementary or 
exaggerated diagrams shall be presented accurately on the plat or map 
where dimensional data is too small to be shown clearly at full scale. 
The plat or map shall be 30 by 42 inches. 

F. The survey shall contain the following applicable information: 

1. The name, address, telephone number, and signature of the 
Professional Land Surveyor who made the survey, his or her official 
seal and registration number, the date the survey was completed and 
the dates of all revisions. 

2. The survey drawing(s) submitted shall bear the following 
certification adjacent to the Engineer's official seal: 

 "I hereby certify that all information indicated on this drawing was 
obtained or verified by actual measurements in the field and that 
every effort has been made to furnish complete and accurate 
information." 

3. Vicinity map showing the property surveyed in reference to nearby 
highways or major street intersections. 

4. Flood zone designation (with proper annotation based on Federal 
Flood Insurance Rate Maps or the state or local equivalent, by 
scaled map location and graphic plotting only). 

5. Land area as defined by the boundaries of the legal description of 
the surveyed premises, including legal description of the land. 

6. All data necessary to indicate the mathematical dimensions and 
relationships of the boundary represented by bearings and distances, 
and the length and radius of each curve, together with elements 
necessary to mathematically define each curve. The point of 
beginning of the surveyor's description and the basis of bearings 
shall also be shown. 

7. When record bearings or angles or distances differ from measured 
bearings, angles or distances, both record and measured bearings, 
angles, and distances shall be clearly indicated. If the record 
description fails to form a mathematically closed figure, the 
surveyor shall so indicate. 

8. Measured and record distances from corners of parcels surveyed to 
the nearest right-of-way lines of streets in urban or suburban 
areas, together with recovered lot corners and evidence of lot 
corners, shall be noted. The distances to the nearest intersecting 
street shall be indicated and verified. Names and widths of streets 


and highways abutting the property surveyed and widths of rights of 
way shall be given. Observable evidence of access (or lack thereof) 
to such abutting streets or highways shall be indicated. Observable 
evidence of private roads shall be so indicated. Streets abutting 
the premises, which have been described in Record Documents, but not 
physically opened, shall be shown and so noted. 

9. The identifying titles of all recorded plats, filed maps, right of 
way maps, or similar documents which the survey represents, wholly 
or in part, with their appropriate recording data. The survey shall 
indicate platted setback or building restriction lines which have 
been recorded in subdivision plats or which appear in a Record 
Document which has been delivered to the surveyor. Contiguity, 
gores, and overlaps along the exterior boundaries of the survey 
premises, where ascertainable from field evidence or Record 
Documents, or interior to those exterior boundaries, shall be 
clearly indicated or noted. Where only a part of a recorded lot or 
parcel is included in the survey, the balance of the lot or parcel 
shall be indicated. 

10. All evidence of found monuments shall be shown and noted. All 
evidence of monuments found beyond the surveyed premises on which 
establishment of the corners of the survey premises are dependent, 
and their application related to the survey shall be indicated. 

11. The character of any and all evidence of possession shall be 
stated and the location of such evidence carefully given in relation 
to both the measured boundary lines and those established by the 
record. An absence of notation on the survey shall be presumptive of 
no observable evidence of possession. 

12. The location of all buildings upon the plot or parcel shall be 
shown and their locations defined by measurements perpendicular to 
the boundaries. If there are no buildings, so state. Proper street 
numbers shall be shown where available. 

13. All easements evidenced by a Record Document which have been 
delivered to the surveyor shall be shown, both those burdening and 
those benefiting the property surveyed, indicating recording 
information. If such an easement cannot be located, a note to this 
affect shall be included. Observable evidence of easements and/or 
servitudes of all kinds, such as those created by roads, rights-ofways, 
water courses, drains, telephone, telegraph, or electric 


lines, water, sewer, oil or gas pipelines on or across the surveyed 
property and on adjoining properties if they appear to affect the 
surveyed property, shall be located and noted. Surface indications, 
if any, or of underground easements and/or servitudes shall also be 
shown. 

14. The character and location of all walls, buildings, fences, and 
other visible improvements within five feet of each side of the 
boundary lines shall be noted. Without expressing a legal opinion, 
physical evidence of all encroaching structural appurtenances and 
projections, such as fire escapes, bay windows, windows and doors 
that open out, flue pipes, stoops, eaves, cornices, areaways, 
stoops, trip, etc., by or on adjoining property or on abutting 
streets, on any easement or over setback lines shown by Record 
Documents shall be indicated with the extent of such encroachment or 
projection. 

15. Driveways and alleys on or crossing the property must be shown. 
Where there is evidence of use by other than the occupants of the 
property, the surveyor must so indicate on the plat or map. Where 
driveways or alleys on adjoining properties encroach, in whole or in 
part, on the property being surveyed, the surveyor must so indicate 
on the plat or map with appropriate measurements. 

16. Location, alignment and dimensions of all roads, curbs, walks, 
parking and paved areas abutting the subject land. Indicate road 
centerlines with true bearings and lengths by 50 foot stationing. 
Describe curves by designating the points of curvature and tangency 
by station. Include all curve data as well a location of radius and 
vertex points. Elevations on 50 foot (15 m) centers on centerline of 
roads, edges of roads and top and bottom of curbs. 

17. As accurately as the evidence permits, the location of cemeteries 
and burial grounds disclosed in the process of researching title to 
the premises or observed in the process of performing the field work 
for the survey, shall be shown. 

18. Ponds, lakes, springs, or rivers bordering on or running through 
the premises being surveyed shall be shown. When a property surveyed 
contains a natural water boundary, the surveyor shall measure the 
location of the boundary according to appropriate surveying methods 
and note on the plat or map the date of the measurement and the 
caveat that the boundary is subject to change due to natural causes 


and that it may or may not represent the actual location of the 
limit of title. When the surveyor is aware of changes in such 
boundaries, the extent of those changes shall be identified. 

19. Contours at a minimum interval of 1 foot (305 mm). Base vertical 
control on the permanent (not assumed) National Geodetic Survey 
(NGS) or VA Medical Center Bench Mark. Note location, description 
and datum. Surveyor to establish three benchmarks on the property 
that are based on the NGS. Horizontal and vertical control to be 
provided on each control point. 

20. Identify and show if possible, setback, height, and floor space 
area restrictions of record or disclosed by applicable zoning or 
building codes (in addition to those recorded in subdivision maps). 
If none, so state. 

21. Exterior dimensions of all buildings at ground level. Show square 
footage of exterior footprint of all buildings at ground level and 
gross floor area of all buildings. 

22. Measured height of all buildings above grade at a defined 
location. If no defined location is provided, the point of 
measurement shall be shown. 

23. Elevations at each entrance to buildings, service docks, building 
corners, steps, ramps and grade slabs. 

24. Substantial, visible improvements (in addition to buildings) such 
as signs, parking areas, swimming pools, etc. 

25. Parking areas and, if striped, the striping and the type (eg. 
handicapped, motorcycle, regular, etc.) and number of parking 
spaces. 

26. Indication of access to a public way such as curb cuts and 
driveways. 

27. Location of utilities existing on or serving the surveyed 
property as determined by observed evidence together with plans and 
markings provided by utility companies, and other appropriate 
sources (with references as to the source of information. Locate and 
show all fire hydrants located within 500 feet of the subject 
property. 

28. Railroad tracks and sidings. 

29. Manholes, catch basins, valve vaults or other surface indications 
of subterranean uses together with depths or invert elevations, 
sizes, and materials of all pipes. 


30. Wires and cables (including their function) crossing the survey 
premises, all poles on or within ten feet of the surveyed premises, 
and the dimensions of all cross-wires or overhangs affecting the 
surveyed premises. 

31. Utility company installations on the surveyed premises. 

32. Names of adjoining owners of platted lands together with zoning 
classification. 

33. Observable evidence of earth moving work, building construction 
or building additions within recent months. 

34. Any changes in street right-of-way lines either completed or 
proposed, and available from the controlling jurisdiction. 
Observable evidence of recent street or sidewalk construction or 
repairs. 

35. Observable evidence of site use as a solid waste dump, sump or 
sanitary landfill. 

36. All trees with a minimum diameter of 6" measured at 48" above the 
base of the tree. Perimeter outline only of thickly wooded areas 
with description of predominant vegetation. 

- - - E N D - - - 

 


SECTION 02 41 00 
DEMOLITION 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION: 

A. This section specifies demolition and removal of portions of buildings, 
utilities, other structures shown and debris from trash dumps. 

1.2 RELATED WORK: 

A. Demolition and removal of roads, walks, curbs, and on-grade slabs 
outside buildings to be demolished: Section 31 20 00, EARTHWORK. 

B. Safety Requirements: GENERAL CONDITIONS Article, ACCIDENT PREVENTION. 

C. Disconnecting utility services prior to demolition: Section 01 00 00, 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

D. Reserved items that are to remain the property of the Government: 
Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

E. Environmental Protection: Section 01 57 19, TEMPORARY ENVIRONMENTAL 
CONTROLS. 

F. Construction Waste Management: Section 017419 CONSTRUCTION WASTE 
MANAGEMENT. 

G. Infectious Control: Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, Article 1.7, 
INFECTION PREVENTION MEASURES. 

1.3 PROTECTION: 

A. Perform demolition in such manner as to eliminate hazards to persons and 
property; to minimize interference with use of adjacent areas, utilities 
and structures or interruption of use of such utilities; and to provide 
free passage to and from such adjacent areas of structures. Comply with 
requirements of GENERAL CONDITIONS Article, ACCIDENT PREVENTION. 

B. Provide safeguards, including warning signs, barricades, temporary 
fences, warning lights, and other similar items that are required for 
protection of all personnel during demolition and removal operations. 
Comply with requirements of Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, 
Article PROTECTION OF EXISTING VEGETATION, STRUCTURES, EQUIPMENT, 
UTILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS. 

C. Maintain fences, barricades, lights, and other similar items around 
exposed excavations until such excavations have been completely filled. 

D. Prevent spread of flying particles and dust. Sprinkle rubbish and debris 
with water to keep dust to a minimum. Do not use water if it results in 
hazardous or objectionable condition such as, but not limited to; ice, 
flooding, or pollution. Vacuum and dust the work area daily. 

 


E. In addition to previously listed fire and safety rules to be observed in 
performance of work, include following: 

1. No wall or part of wall shall be permitted to fall outwardly from 
structures. 

2. Wherever a cutting torch or other equipment that might cause a fire 
is used, provide and maintain fire extinguishers nearby ready for 
immediate use. Instruct all possible users in use of fire 
extinguishers. 

3. Keep hydrants clear and accessible at all times. Prohibit debris from 
accumulating within a radius of 4500 mm (15 feet) of fire hydrants. 

F. Before beginning any demolition work, the Contractor shall survey the 
site and examine the drawings and specifications to determine the extent 
of the work. The contractor shall take necessary precautions to avoid 
damages to existing items to remain in place, to be reused, or to remain 
the property of the Medical Center; any damaged items shall be repaired 
or replaced as approved by the Resident Engineer. The Contractor shall 
coordinate the work of this section with all other work and shall 
construct and maintain shoring, bracing, and supports as required. The 
Contractor shall ensure that structural elements are not overloaded and 
shall be responsible for increasing structural supports or adding new 
supports as may be required as a result of any cutting, removal, or 
demolition work performed under this contract. Do not overload 
structural elements. Provide new supports and reinforcement for existing 
construction weakened by demolition or removal works. Repairs, 
reinforcement, or structural replacement must have Resident Engineer’s 
approval. 

G. The work shall comply with the requirements of Section 01 57 19, 
TEMPORARY ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS. 

H. The work shall comply with the requirements of Section 01 00 00, GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS, Article 1.7 INFECTION PREVENTION MEASURES. 

1.4 UTILITY SERVICES: 

A. Demolish and remove outside utility service lines shown to be removed. 

B. Remove abandoned outside utility lines that would interfere with 
installation of new utility lines and new construction. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) 

PART 3 – EXECUTION 

3.1 DEMOLITION: 

A. Debris, including brick, concrete, stone, metals and similar materials 
shall become property of Contractor and shall be disposed of by him 
daily, off the Medical Center to avoid accumulation at the demolition 


site. Materials that cannot be removed daily shall be stored in areas 
specified by the Resident Engineer. Contractor shall dispose debris in 
compliance with applicable federal, state or local permits, rules and/or 
regulations. 

B. Remove and legally dispose of all materials, other than earth to remain 
as part of project work. Materials removed shall become property of 
contractor and shall be disposed of in compliance with applicable 
federal, state or local permits, rules and/or regulations 

C. Remove existing utilities as indicated or uncovered by work and 
terminate in a manner conforming to the nationally recognized code 
covering the specific utility and approved by the Resident Engineer. 
When Utility lines are encountered that are not indicated on the 
drawings, the Resident Engineer shall be notified prior to further work 
in that area. 

3.2 CLEAN-UP: 

A. On completion of work of this section and after removal of all debris, 
leave site in clean condition satisfactory to Resident Engineer. 
Clean-up shall include off the Medical Center disposal of all items and 
materials not required to remain property of the Government as well as 
all debris and rubbish resulting from demolition operations. 

- - - E N D - - - 


 

SECTION 02 82 11 
TRADITIONAL ASBESTOS ABATEMENT 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1.1 SUMMARY OF THE WORK....................................................1 
1.1.1 CONTRACT DOCUMENTS AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS..........................1 
1.1.2 EXTENT OF WORK.......................................................2 
1.1.3 RELATED WORK.........................................................2 
1.1.4 TASKS................................................................2 
1.1.5 CONTRACTORS USE OF PREMISES..........................................3 
1.2 VARIATIONS IN QUANTITY.................................................3 
1.3 STOP ASBESTOS REMOVAL..................................................3 
1.4 DEFINITIONS............................................................4 
1.4.1 GENERAL..............................................................4 
1.4.2 GLOSSARY.............................................................4 
1.4.3 REFERENCED STANDARDS ORGANIZATIONS...................................10 
1.5 APPLICABLE CODES AND REGULATIONS.......................................12 
1.5.1 GENERAL APPLICABILITY OF CODES, REGULATIONS, AND STANDARDS...........12 
1.5.2 Asbestos Abatement CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY.........................12 
1.5.3 FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS.................................................12 
1.5.4 STATE REQUIREMENTS...................................................13 
1.5.6 STANDARDS............................................................13 
1.5.7 EPA GUIDANCE DOCUMENTS...............................................13 
1.5.8 NOTICES..............................................................13 
1.5.9 PERMITS/LICENSES.....................................................13 
1.5.10 POSTING AND FILING OF REGULATIONS...................................14 
1.5.11 VA RESPONSIBILITIES.................................................14 
1.5.12 EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN AND ARRANGEMENTS..............................14 
1.5.13 PRE-CONSTRUCTION MEETING............................................15 
1.6 PROJECT COORDINATION...................................................16 
1.6.1 PERSONNEL............................................................16 
1.7 RESPIRATORY PROTECTION.................................................17 
1.7.1 GENERAL - RESPIRATORY PROTECTION PROGRAM.............................17 
1.7.2 RESPIRATORY PROTECTION PROGRAM COORDINATOR...........................17 
1.7.3 SELECTION AND USE OF RESPIRATORS.....................................17 
1.7.4 MINIMUM RESPIRATORY PROTECTION.......................................17 
1.7.5 MEDICAL WRITTEN OPINION..............................................17 
1.7.6 RESPIRATOR FIT TEST..................................................17 
1.7.7 RESPIRATOR FIT CHECK.................................................18 
1.7.8 MAINTENANCE AND CARE OF RESPIRATORS..................................18 
1.7.9 SUPPLIED AIR SYSTEMS.................................................18 
1.8 WORKER PROTECTION......................................................18 
1.8.1 TRAINING OF ABATEMENT PERSONNEL......................................18 
1.8.2 MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS.................................................18 
1.8.3 REGULATED AREA ENTRY PROCEDURE.......................................18 
1.8.4 DECONTAMINATION PROCEDURE............................................19 
1.8.5 REGULATED AREA REQUIREMENTS..........................................19 
1.9 DECONTAMINATION FACILITIES.............................................19 
1.9.1 DESCRIPTION..........................................................19 
1.9.2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.................................................20 
1.9.3 TEMPORARY FACILITIES TO THE PDF and W/EDF............................20 
1.9.4 PERSONNEL DECONTAMINATION FACILITY (PDF).............................20 
1.9.5 WASTE/EQUIPMENT DECONTAMINATION FACILITY (W/EDF).....................22 
1.9.6 WASTE/EQUIPMENT DECONTAMINATION PROCEDURES...........................23 
PART 2 - PRODUCTS, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.................................23 
2.1 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT................................................23 
2.1.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.................................................23 
2.2 MONITORING, INSPECTION AND TESTING.....................................25 
2.2.1 GENERAL..............................................................25 
2.2.2 SCOPE OF SERVICES OF THE VPIH/CIH CONSULTANT.........................25 
2.2.3 MONITORING, INSPECTION AND TESTING BY CONTRACTOR CPIH/CIH............26 
2.3 ASBESTOS hAZARD aBATEMENT pLAN.........................................27 
2.4 SUBMITTALS.............................................................27 
2.4.1 PRE-START MEETING SUBMITTALS.........................................27 
2.4.2 SUBMITTALS DURING ABATEMENT..........................................29 
2.4.3 SUBMITTALS AT COMPLETION OF ABATEMENT................................30 
2.5 ENCAPSULANTS...........................................................30 
2.5.1 TYPES OF ENCAPSULANTS................................................30 
2.5.2 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS.............................................30 
2.5.3 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE...........................................31 
PART 3 - EXECUTION.........................................................31 
3.1 REGULATED AREA PREPARATIONS............................................31 
3.1.3.1 DESIGN AND LAYOUT..................................................32 
3.1.3.2 NEGATIVE AIR MACHINES (HEPA UNITS).................................33 
3.1.3.3 PRESSURE DIFFERENTIAL..............................................34 
3.1.3.4 MONITORING.........................................................34 
3.1.3.5 AUXILIARY GENERATOR................................................34 
3.1.3.6SUPPLEMENTAL MAKE-UP AIR INLETS.....................................34 
3.1.3.7 TESTING THE SYSTEM.................................................35 
3.1.3.8 DEMONSTRATION OF THE NEGATIVE PRESSURE Filtration SYSTEM........35 
3.1.3.9 USE OF THE NEGATIVE PRESSURE FILTRATION SYSTEM DURING 
ABATEMENT OPERATIONS.................................................35 
3.1.3.10 DISMANTLING THE SYSTEM............................................36 
3.1.4 CONTAINMENT BARRIERS AND COVERINGS IN THE REGULATED AREA.............36 
3.1.4.1 GENERAL............................................................36 
3.1.4.2 PREPARATION PRIOR TO SEALING THE REGULATED AREA....................36 
3.1.4.3 CONTROLLING ACCESS TO THE REGULATED AREA...........................36 
3.1.4.4 CRITICAL BARRIERS..................................................37 
3.1.4.5 PRIMARY BARRIERS...................................................37 
3.1.4.6 SECONDARY BARRIERS.................................................37 
3.1.4.7 EXTENSION OF THE REGULATED AREA....................................37 
3.1.4.8 FIRESTOPPING.......................................................37 
3.1.5 Sanitary facilities..................................................38 
3.1.6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT........................................38 
3.1.7 Pre-cleaning.........................................................38 
3.1.8 PRE-ABATEMENT ACTIVITIES.............................................39 
3.1.8.1 PRE-ABATEMENT Meeting..............................................39 
3.1.8.2 PRE-ABATEMENT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS..........................39 
3.1.8.3 PRE-ABATEMENT INSPECTIONS AND PREPARATIONS.........................40 
3.2 REMOVAL OF ACM.........................................................41 
3.2.1 WETTING acm..........................................................41 
3.2.2 SECONDARY BARRIER AND WALKWAYS.......................................41 
3.2.3 WET REMOVAL OF ACM...................................................41 
3.2.4 WET REMOVAL OF AMOSITE...............................................42 
3.3 LOCKDOWN ENCAPSULATION.................................................43 
3.3.1 GENERAL..............................................................43 
3.3.2 DELIVERY AND STORAGE.................................................43 
3.3.3 WORKER PROTECTION....................................................43 
3.3.4 ENCAPSULATION OF SCRATCH COAT PLASTER OR PIPING......................43 
3.3.5 SEALING EXPOSED EDGES................................................44 
3.4 DISPOSAL OF ACM WASTE MATERIALS........................................44 
3.4.1 GENERAL..............................................................44 
3.4.2 PROCEDURES...........................................................44 
3.5 PROJECT DECONTAMINATION................................................44 
3.5.1 GENERAL..............................................................44 
3.5.2 REGULATED AREA CLEARANCE.............................................45 
3.5.3 WORK DESCRIPTION.....................................................45 
3.5.4 PRE-DECONTAMINATION CONDITIONS.......................................45 
3.5.5 FIRST CLEANING.......................................................45 
3.5.6 PRE-CLEARANCE INSPECTION AND TESTING.................................45 
3.5.7 LOCKDOWN ENCAPSULATION OF ABATED SURFACES............................46 
3.6 FINAL VISUAL INSPECTION AND AIR CLEARANCE TESTING......................46 
3.6.1 GENERAL..............................................................46 
3.6.2 FINAL VISUAL INSPECTION..............................................46 
3.6.3 FINAL AIR CLEARANCE TESTING..........................................46 
3.6.4 FINAL AIR CLEARANCE PROCEDURES.......................................46 
3.6.5 CLEARANCE SAMPLING USING PCM – LESS THAN 260LF/160SF:................47 
3.6.8 LABORATORY TESTING OF TEM SAMPLES....................................48 
3.7 ABATEMENT CLOSEOUT AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.......................48 
3.7.1 COMPLETION OF ABATEMENT WORK.........................................48 
3.7.2 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION BY CONTRACTOR..............................49 
3.7.3 WORK SHIFTS..........................................................49 
3.7.4 RE-INSULATION........................................................49 
ATTACHMENT #1..............................................................49 
ATTACHMENT #2..............................................................50 
ATTACHMENT #4..............................................................53 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 


INSTRUCTIONS TO ARCHITECT/ENGINEER AND INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE CONSULTANT 

SECTION 02 82 11 
CLASS I NEGATIVE PRESSURE ENCLOSURE ASBESTOS ABATEMENT SPECIFICATIONS 

 

1. These specifications provide general guidance to personnel given the 
task of designing and executing a Class I negative pressure 
enclosure asbestos abatement project. Each abatement is a unique 
situation and therefore must be tailored for that project. This 
specification incorporates current regulatory requirements and 
current best abatement practices, procedures and technology. The 
Architect/Engineer and/or the Industrial Hygiene consultants may 
provide additional specification additions or deletions to this 
specification that, in their professional judgment, will ensure a 
safe and effective approach to a specific abatement project while 
maintaining compliance with applicable regulations and VA policy. 
Any changes must be clearly marked on/attached to this document 
prior to finalization of the specification so that the changes will 
be adequately considered in the review process by the VA. 

2. These specifications are to be used in conjunction with asbestos 
abatement contractor selection criteria; special instructions 
package; and general construction provisions. 

3. Paragraphs that are not preceded by a number code are indented as 
instructions to the specifications writer and identified by the 
notation "Spec Writer Notes". These paragraphs must be deleted from 
the final document. 

4. Within the text of the specifications, there may be optional 
procedures which the specification writer could include in the final 
specification. Procedures which are not chosen must be deleted by 
the specification writer. Optional text is shown by the notation 
(//text//). 

5. The specification writer, VPIH/CIH, CPIH/CIH, and A/E must be aware 
of and read the VA A/E Quality Alert 07/09 since it details common 
errors in specification and contract documents for asbestos project. 
This would be especially helpful if a survey is being conducted 
prior to an abatement project. A full AHERA survey of the facility 
would be needed prior to renovation activities, however, if 
demolition of the facility is planned, a NESHAP survey of the 
facility would need to be performed. 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

1.1.1 CONTRACT DOCUMENTS AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS 

 Drawings, general provisions of the contract, including general and 
supplementary conditions and other Division 01 specifications, shall 
apply to the work of this section. The contract documents show the work 
to be done under the contract and related requirements and conditions 
impacting the project. Related requirements and conditions include 
applicable codes and regulations, notices and permits, existing site 
conditions and restrictions on use of the site, requirements for 
partial owner occupancy during the work, coordination with other work 
and the phasing of the work. In the event the Asbestos Abatement 
Contractor discovers a conflict in the contract documents and/or 
requirements or codes, the conflict must be brought to the immediate 
attention of the Contracting Officer for resolution. Whenever there is 


a conflict or overlap in the requirements, the most stringent shall 
apply. Any actions taken by the Contractor without obtaining guidance 
from the Contracting Officer shall become the sole risk and 
responsibility of the Asbestos Abatement Contractor. All costs incurred 
due to such action are also the responsibility of the Asbestos 
Abatement Contractor. 

 

1.1.2 EXTENT OF WORK 

A. Below is a brief description of the estimated quantities of asbestos 
containing materials to be abated. These quantities are for 
informational purposes only and are based on the best information 
available at the time of the specification preparation. The Contractor 
shall satisfy himself as the actual quantities to be abated. Nothing in 
this section may be interpreted as limiting the extent of work 
otherwise required by this contract and related documents. 

 B. Removal, clean-up and disposal of asbestos containing materials (ACM) 
and asbestos/waste contaminated elements in an appropriate regulated 
area for the following approximate quantities; 

 

Bldg. 1 South (JLM) 

 (10,400) square feet of asbestos containing & non-asbestos containing 
floor tile and associated asbestos containing mastic located on the 
ground floor within the project area. 

 

1.1.3 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

B. Section 02 41 00, DEMOLITION. 

C. Division 09, FINISHES 

D. Division 22, PLUMBING. 

E. Section 21 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR FIRE SUPPRESSION / Section 22 
05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING / Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK 
RESULTS FOR HVAC AND STEAM GENERATION. 

F. Section 21 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR FIRE SUPPRESSION / Section 22 
05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING / Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK 
RESULTS FOR HVAC AND STEAM GENERATION 

G. Section 23 07 11, HVAC, PLUMBING, AND BOILER PLANT INSULATION. 

H. Section 22 05 19, METERS AND GAGES FOR PLUMBING PIPING / Section 22 05 
23, GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR PLUMBING PIPING / Section 22 05 33, HEAT 
TRACING FOR PLUMBING PIPING / Section 22 11 00, FACILITY WATER 
DISTRIBUTION / Section 22 13 00, FACILITY SANITARY SEWERAGE / Section 
22 13 23, SANITARY WASTE INTERCEPTORS / Section 22 14 00, FACILITY 
STORM DRAINAGE / Section 22 66 00, CHEMICAL-WASTE SYSTEMS FOR 
LABORATORY AND HEALTHCARE FACILITIES / Section 23 11 23, FACILITY 
NATURAL-GAS PIPING. 

I. Section 23 21 13, HYDRONIC PIPING / Section 23 22 13, STEAM AND 
CONDENSATE HEATING PIPING. 

J. Section 23 31 00, HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS / Section 23 37 00, AIR 
OUTLETS AND INLETS. 

 

1.1.4 TASKS 

 The work tasks are summarized briefly as follows: 

A. Pre-abatement activities including pre-abatement meeting(s), 
inspection(s), notifications, permits, submittal approvals, regulated 
area preparations, emergency procedures arrangements, and standard 
operating procedures for asbestos abatement work. 


B. Abatement activities including removal, clean-up and disposal of ACM 
waste, recordkeeping, security, monitoring, and inspections. 

C. Cleaning and decontamination activities including final visual 
inspection, air monitoring and certification of decontamination. 

 

1.1.5 CONTRACTORS USE OF PREMISES 

A. The Contractor and Contractor's personnel shall cooperate fully with 
the VA representative/consultant to facilitate efficient use of 
buildings and areas within buildings. The Contractor shall perform the 
work in accordance with the VA specifications, drawings, phasing plan 
and in compliance with any/all applicable Federal, State and Local 
regulations and requirements. 

B. The Contractor shall use the existing facilities in the building 
strictly within the limits indicated in contract documents as well as 
the approved VA Design and Construction Procedures. VA Design and 
Construction Procedures drawings of partially occupied buildings will 
show the limits of regulated areas; the placement of decontamination 
facilities; the temporary location of bagged waste ACM; the path of 
transport to outside the building; and the temporary waste storage area 
for each building/regulated area. Any variation from the arrangements 
shown on drawings shall be secured in writing from the VA 
representative through the pre-abatement plan of action. The following 
limitations of use shall apply to existing facilities shown on 
drawings: 

 

1.2 VARIATIONS IN QUANTITY 

 The quantities and locations of ACM as indicated on the drawings and 
the extent of work included in this section are estimated which are 
limited by the physical constraints imposed by occupancy of the 
buildings and accessibility to ACM. Accordingly, minor variations (+/- 
5%) in quantities of ACM within the regulated area are considered as 
having no impact on contract price and time requirements of this 
contract. Where additional work is required beyond the above variation, 
the contractor shall provide unit prices for newly discovered ACM and 
those prices shall be used for additional work required under the 
contractor. Contractor should refer to "Differing Site Conditions"; 
(FAR 52.236-2) of Section 00 72 00, General Conditions. 

 

1.3 STOP ASBESTOS REMOVAL 

 If the Contracting Officer; their field representative; (the facility 
Safety Officer/Manager or their designee, or the VA Professional 
Industrial Hygienist/Certified Industrial Hygienist (VPIH/CIH) presents 
a verbal Stop Asbestos Removal Order, the Contractor/Personnel shall 
immediately stop all asbestos removal and maintain HEPA filtered 
negative pressure air flow in the containment and adequately wet any 
exposed ACM. If a verbal Stop Asbestos Removal Order is issued, the VA 
shall follow-up with a written order to the Contractor as soon as it is 
practicable. The Contractor shall not resume any asbestos removal 
activity until authorized to do so in writing by the VA Contracting 
Officer. A stop asbestos removal order may be issued at any time the VA 
Contracting Officer determines abatement conditions/activities are not 
within VA specification, regulatory requirements or that an imminent 
hazard exists to human health or the environment. Work stoppage will 
continue until conditions have been corrected to the satisfaction of 
the VA. Standby time and costs for corrective actions will be borne by 


the Contractor, including the VPIH/CIH time. The occurrence of any of 
the following events shall be reported immediately by the Contractor’s 
competent person to the VA Contracting Office or field representative 
using the most expeditious means (e.g., verbal or telephonic), followed 
up with written notification to the Contracting Officer as soon as 
practical. The Contractor shall immediately stop asbestos 
removal/disturbance activities and initiate fiber reduction activities: 

A. Airborne PCM analysis results equal to or greater than 0.01 f/cc 
outside a regulated area or >0.05 f/cc inside a regulated area; 

B. breach or break in regulated area containment barrier(s); 

C. less than –0.02” WCG pressure in the regulated area; 

D. serious injury/death at the site; 

E. fire/safety emergency at the site; 

F. respiratory protection system failure; 

G. power failure or loss of wetting agent; or 

H. any visible emissions observed outside the regulated area. 

 

1.4 DEFINITIONS 

1.4.1 GENERAL 

 Definitions and explanations here are neither complete nor exclusive of 
all terms used in the contract documents, but are general for the work 
to the extent they are not stated more explicitly in another element of 
the contract documents. Drawings must be recognized as diagrammatic in 
nature and not completely descriptive of the requirements indicated 
therein. 

 

1.4.2 GLOSSARY 

 Abatement - Procedures to control fiber release from asbestoscontaining 
materials. Includes removal, encapsulation, enclosure, 
demolition, and renovation activities related to asbestos containing 
materials (ACM). 

 

 Aerosol - Solid or liquid particulate suspended in air. 

 Adequately wet - Sufficiently mixed or penetrated with liquid to 
prevent the release of particulates. If visible emissions are observed 
coming from the ACM, then that material has not been adequately wetted. 

 Aggressive method - Removal or disturbance of building material by 
sanding, abrading, grinding, or other method that breaks, crumbles, or 
disintegrates intact ACM. 

 Aggressive sampling - EPA AHERA defined clearance sampling method using 
air moving equipment such as fans and leaf blowers to aggressively 
disturb and maintain in the air residual fibers after abatement. 

 AHERA - Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act. Asbestos regulations 
for schools issued in 1987. 

 Aircell - Pipe or duct insulation made of corrugated cardboard which 
contains asbestos. 

 Air monitoring - The process of measuring the fiber content of a known 
volume of air collected over a specified period of time. The NIOSH 7400 
Method, Issue 2 is used to determine the fiber levels in air. For 
personal samples and clearance air testing using Phase Contrast 
Microscopy (PCM) analysis. NIOSH Method 7402 can be used when it is 
necessary to confirm fibers counted by PCM as being asbestos. The AHERA 
TEM analysis may be used for background, area samples and clearance 
samples when required by this specification, or at the discretion of 
the VPIH/CIH as appropriate. 


 Air sample filter - The filter used to collect fibers which are then 
counted. The filter is made of mixed cellulose ester membrane for PCM 
(Phase Contrast Microscopy) and polycarbonate for TEM (Transmission 
Electron Microscopy) 

 Amended water - Water to which a surfactant (wetting agent) has been 
added to increase the penetrating ability of the liquid. 

 Asbestos - Includes chrysotile, amosite, crocidolite, tremolite 
asbestos, anthophyllite asbestos, actinolite asbestos, and any of these 
minerals that have been chemically treated or altered. Asbestos also 
includes PACM, as defined below. 

 Asbestos Hazard Abatement Plan (AHAP) - Asbestos work procedures 
required to be submitted by the contractor before work begins. 

 Asbestos-containing material (ACM) - Any material containing more than 
one percent of asbestos. 

 Asbestos contaminated elements (ACE) - Building elements such as 
ceilings, walls, lights, or ductwork that are contaminated with asbestos. 

 Asbestos-contaminated soil (ACS) – Soil found in the work area or in 
adjacent areas such as crawlspaces or pipe tunnels which is contaminated 
with asbestos-containing material debris and cannot be easily separated 
from the material. 

 Asbestos-containing waste (ACW) material - Asbestos-containing material 
or asbestos contaminated objects requiring disposal. 

 Asbestos Project Monitor – Some sates require that any person conducting 
asbestos abatement clearance inspections and clearance air sampling be 
licensed as an asbestos project monitor. 

 Asbestos waste decontamination facility - A system consisting of drum/bag 
washing facilities and a temporary storage area for cleaned containers of 
asbestos waste. Used as the exit for waste and equipment leaving the 
regulated area. In an emergency, it may be used to evacuate personnel. 

 Authorized person - Any person authorized by the VA, the Contractor, or 
government agency and required by work duties to be present in 
regulated areas. 

 Authorized visitor - Any person approved by the VA; the contractor; or 
any government agency representative having jurisdiction over the 
regulated area (e.g., OSHA, Federal and State EPA. 

 Barrier - Any surface the isolates the regulated area and inhibits 
fiber migration from the regulated area. 

 Containment Barrier - An airtight barrier consisting of walls, floors, 
and/or ceilings of sealed plastic sheeting which surrounds and seals 
the outer perimeter of the regulated area. 

 Critical Barrier - The barrier responsible for isolating the regulated 
area from adjacent spaces, typically constructed of plastic sheeting 
secured in place at openings such as doors, windows, or any other 
opening into the regulated area. 

 Primary Barrier – Plastic barriers placed over critical barriers and 
exposed directly to abatement work. 

 Secondary Barrier - Any additional plastic barriers used to isolate and 
provide protection from debris during abatement work. 

 Breathing zone - The hemisphere forward of the shoulders with a radius 
of about 150 - 225 mm (6 - 9 inches) from the worker's nose. 

 Bridging encapsulant - An encapsulant that forms a layer on the surface 
of the ACM. 

 Building/facility owner - The legal entity, including a lessee, which 
exercises control over management and recordkeeping functions relating 
to a building and/or facility in which asbestos activities take place. 

 Bulk testing - The collection and analysis of suspect asbestos 
containing materials. 


 Certified Industrial Hygienist (CIH) - A person certified in the 
comprehensive practice of industrial hygiene by the American Board of 
Industrial Hygiene. 

 Class I asbestos work - Activities involving the removal of Thermal 
System Insulation (TSI) and surfacing ACM and Presumed Asbestos 
Containing Material (PACM). 

 Class II asbestos work - Activities involving the removal of ACM which 
is not thermal system insulation or surfacing material. This includes, 
but is not limited to, the removal of asbestos-containing wallboard, 
floor tile and sheeting, roofing and siding shingles, and construction 
mastic. 

 Clean room/Changing room - An uncontaminated room having facilities for 
the storage of employee's street clothing and uncontaminated materials 
and equipment. 

 Clearance sample - The final air sample taken after all asbestos work 
has been done and visually inspected. Performed by the VA's 
professional industrial hygiene consultant/Certified Industrial 
Hygienist (VPIH/CIH). 

 Closely resemble - The major workplace conditions which have 
contributed to the levels of historic asbestos exposure, are no more 
protective than conditions of the current workplace. 

 Competent person - In addition to the definition in 29 CFR 1926.32(f), 
one who is capable of identifying existing asbestos hazards in the 
workplace and selecting the appropriate control strategy for asbestos 
exposure, who has the authority to take prompt corrective measures to 
eliminate them, as specified in 29 CFR 1926.32(f); in addition, for 
Class I and II work who is specially trained in a training course which 
meets the criteria of EPA's Model Accreditation Plan (40 CFR 763) for 
supervisor. 

 Contractor's Professional Industrial Hygienist (CPIH/CIH) - The 
asbestos abatement contractor's industrial hygienist. The industrial 
hygienist must meet the qualification requirements of a PIH and may be 
a certified industrial hygienist (CIH). 

 Count - Refers to the fiber count or the average number of fibers 
greater than five microns in length with a length-to-width (aspect) 
ratio of at least 3 to 1, per cubic centimeter of air. 

 Crawlspace – An area which can be found either in or adjacent to the 
work area. This area has limited access and egress and may contain 
asbestos materials and/or asbestos contaminated soil. 

 Decontamination area/unit - An enclosed area adjacent to and connected 
to the regulated area and consisting of an equipment room, shower room, 
and clean room, which is used for the decontamination of workers, 
materials, and equipment that are contaminated with asbestos. 

 Demolition - The wrecking or taking out of any load-supporting 
structural member and any related razing, removing, or stripping of 
asbestos products. 

 VA Total – means a building or substantial part of the building is 
completely removed, torn or knocked down, bulldozed, flattened, or 
razed, including removal of building debris. 

 Disposal bag - Typically 6 mil thick sift-proof, dustproof, leak-tight 
container used to package and transport asbestos waste from regulated 
areas to the approved landfill. Each bag/container must be 
labeled/marked in accordance with EPA, OSHA and DOT requirements. 

 Disturbance - Activities that disrupt the matrix of ACM or PACM, 
crumble or pulverize ACM or PACM, or generate visible debris from ACM 
or PACM. Disturbance includes cutting away small amounts of ACM or 
PACM, no greater than the amount that can be contained in one standard 


sized glove bag or waste bag in order to access a building component. 
In no event shall the amount of ACM or PACM so disturbed exceed that 
which can be contained in one glove bag or disposal bag which shall not 
exceed 60 inches in length or width. 

 Drum - A rigid, impermeable container made of cardboard fiber, plastic, 
or metal which can be sealed in order to be sift-proof, dustproof, and 
leak-tight. 

 Employee exposure - The exposure to airborne asbestos that would occur 
if the employee were not wearing respiratory protection equipment. 

 Encapsulant - A material that surrounds or embeds asbestos fibers in an 
adhesive matrix and prevents the release of fibers. 

 Encapsulation - Treating ACM with an encapsulant. 

 Enclosure - The construction of an air tight, impermeable, permanent 
barrier around ACM to control the release of asbestos fibers from the 
material and also eliminate access to the material. 

 Equipment room - A contaminated room located within the decontamination 
area that is supplied with impermeable bags or containers for the 
disposal of contaminated protective clothing and equipment. 

 Fiber - A particulate form of asbestos, 5 microns or longer, with a 
length to width (aspect) ratio of at least 3 to 1. 

 Fibers per cubic centimeter (f/cc) - Abbreviation for fibers per cubic 
centimeter, used to describe the level of asbestos fibers in air. 

 Filter - Media used in respirators, vacuums, or other machines to 
remove particulate from air. 

 Firestopping - Material used to close the open parts of a structure in 
order to prevent a fire from spreading. 

 Friable asbestos containing material - Any material containing more 
than one (1) percent or asbestos as determined using the method 
specified in appendix A, Subpart F, 40 CFR 763, section 1, Polarized 
Light Microscopy, that, when dry, can be crumbled, pulverized, or 
reduced to powder by hand pressure. 

 Glovebag - Not more than a 60 x 60 inch impervious plastic bag-like 
enclosure affixed around an asbestos-containing material, with glovelike 
appendages through which materials and tools may be handled. 

 High efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter – An ASHRAE MERV 17 
filter capable of trapping and retaining at least 99.97 percent of all 
mono-dispersed particles of 0.3 micrometers in diameter. 

 HEPA vacuum - Vacuum collection equipment equipped with a HEPA filter 
system capable of collecting and retaining asbestos fibers. 

 Homogeneous area - An area of surfacing, thermal system insulation or 
miscellaneous ACM that is uniform in color, texture and date of 
application. 

 HVAC - Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning 

 Industrial hygienist (IH) - A professional qualified by education, 
training, and experience to anticipate, recognize, evaluate and develop 
controls for occupational health hazards. Meets definition requirements 
of the American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA). 

 Industrial hygienist technician (IH Technician) - A person working under 
the direction of an IH or CIH who has special training, experience, 
certifications and licenses required for the industrial hygiene work 
assigned. Some states require that an industrial hygienist technician 
conducting asbestos abatement clearance inspection and clearance air 
sampling be licensed as an asbestos project monitor. 

 Intact - The ACM has not crumbled, been pulverized, or otherwise 
deteriorated so that the asbestos is no longer likely to be bound with 
its matrix. 


 Lockdown - Applying encapsulant, after a final visual inspection, on all 
abated surfaces at the conclusion of ACM removal prior to removal of 
critical barriers. 

 National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP) - EPA's 
rule to control emissions of asbestos to the environment (40 CFR part 61, 
Subpart M). 

 Negative initial exposure assessment - A demonstration by the employer 
which complies with the criteria in 29 CFR 1926.1101 (f)(2)(iii), that 
employee exposure during an operation is expected to be consistently 
below the PEL. 

 Negative pressure - Air pressure which is lower than the surrounding 
area, created by exhausting air from a sealed regulated area through 
HEPA equipped filtration units. OSHA requires maintaining -0.02" water 
column gauge inside the negative pressure enclosure. 

 Negative pressure respirator - A respirator in which the air pressure 
inside the facepiece is negative during inhalation relative to the air 
pressure outside the respirator facepiece. 

 Non-friable ACM - Material that contains more than 1 percent asbestos 
but cannot be crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand 
pressure. 

 Organic vapor cartridge - The type of cartridge used on air purifying 
respirators to remove organic vapor hazardous air contaminants. 

 Outside air - The air outside buildings and structures, including, but 
not limited to, the air under a bridge or in an open ferry dock. 

 Owner/operator - Any person who owns, leases, operates, controls, or 
supervises the facility being demolished or renovated or any person who 
owns, leases, operates, controls, or supervises the demolition or 
renovation operation, or both. 

 Penetrating encapsulant - Encapsulant that is absorbed into the ACM 
matrix without leaving a surface layer. 

 Personal sampling/monitoring - Representative air samples obtained in 
the breathing zone for one or workers within the regulated area using a 
filter cassette and a calibrated air sampling pump to determine 
asbestos exposure. 

 Permissible exposure limit (PEL) - The level of exposure OSHA allows 
for an 8 hour time weighted average. For asbestos fibers, the eight (8) 
hour time weighted average PEL is 0.1 fibers per cubic centimeter (0.1 
f/cc) of air and the 30-minute Excursion Limit is 1.0 fibers per cubic 
centimeter (1 f/cc). 

 Personal protective equipment (PPE) – equipment designed to protect 
user from injury and/or specific job hazard. Such equipment may 
include protective clothing, hard hats, safety glasses, and 
respirators. 

 Pipe tunnel – An area, typically located adjacent to mechanical spaces 
or boiler rooms in which the pipes servicing the heating system in the 
building are routed to allow the pipes to access heating elements. 
These areas may contain asbestos pipe insulation, asbestos fittings, or 
asbestos-contaminated soil. 

 Polarized light microscopy (PLM) - Light microscopy using dispersion 
staining techniques and refractive indices to identify and quantify the 
type(s) of asbestos present in a bulk sample. 

 Polyethylene sheeting - Strong plastic barrier material 4 to 6 mils 
thick, semi-transparent, flame retardant per NFPA 241. 

 Positive/negative fit check - A method of verifying the seal of a 
facepiece respirator by temporarily occluding the filters and breathing 
in (inhaling) and then temporarily occluding the exhalation valve and 


breathing out (exhaling) while checking for inward or outward leakage 
of the respirator respectively. 

 Presumed ACM (PACM) - Thermal system insulation, surfacing, and 
flooring material installed in buildings prior to 1981. If the building 
owner has actual knowledge, or should have known through the exercise 
of due diligence that other materials are ACM, they too must be treated 
as PACM. The designation of PACM may be rebutted pursuant to 29 CFR 
1926.1101 (b). 

 Professional IH - An IH who meets the definition requirements of AIHA; 
meets the definition requirements of OSHA as a "Competent Person" at 29 
CFR 1926.1101 (b); has completed two specialized EPA approved courses 
on management and supervision of asbestos abatement projects; has 
formal training in respiratory protection and waste disposal; and has a 
minimum of four projects of similar complexity with this project of 
which at least three projects serving as the supervisory IH. The PIH 
may be either the VA’s PIH (VPIH) or Contractor’s PIH (CPIH/CIH). 

 Project designer - A person who has successfully completed the training 
requirements for an asbestos abatement project designer as required by 
40 CFR 763 Appendix C, Part I; (B)(5). 

 Assigned protection factor - A value assigned by OSHA/NIOSH to indicate 
the expected protection provided by each respirator class, when the 
respirator is properly selected and worn correctly. The number 
indicates the reduction of exposure level from outside to inside the 
respirator facepiece. 

 Qualitative fit test (QLFT) - A fit test using a challenge material 
that can be sensed by the wearer if leakage in the respirator occurs. 

 Quantitative fit test (QNFT) - A fit test using a challenge material 
which is quantified outside and inside the respirator thus allowing the 
determination of the actual fit factor. 

 Regulated area - An area established by the employer to demarcate where 
Class I, II, III asbestos work is conducted, and any adjoining area 
where debris and waste from such asbestos work may accumulate; and a 
work area within which airborne concentrations of asbestos exceed, or 
there is a reasonable possibility they may exceed the PEL. 

 Regulated ACM (RACM) - Friable ACM; Category I non-friable ACM that has 
become friable; Category I non-friable ACM that will be or has been 
subjected to sanding, grinding, cutting, or abrading or; Category II 
non-friable ACM that has a high probability of becoming or has become 
crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by the forces expected to 
act on the material in the course of the demolition or renovation 
operation. 

 Removal - All operations where ACM, PACM and/or RACM is taken out or 
stripped from structures or substrates, including demolition 
operations. 

 Renovation - Altering a facility or one or more facility components in 
any way, including the stripping or removal of asbestos from a facility 
component which does not involve demolition activity. 

 Repair - Overhauling, rebuilding, reconstructing, or reconditioning of 
structures or substrates, including encapsulation or other repair of 
ACM or PACM attached to structures or substrates. 

 Shower room - The portion of the PDF where personnel shower before 
leaving the regulated area. 

Supplied air respirator (SAR) - A respiratory protection system that 
supplies minimum Grade D respirable air per ANSI/Compressed Gas 
Association Commodity Specification for Air, G-7.1-1989. 


 Surfacing ACM - A material containing more than 1 percent asbestos that 
is sprayed, troweled on or otherwise applied to surfaces for 
acoustical, fireproofing and other purposes. 

 Surfactant - A chemical added to water to decrease water's surface 
tension thus making it more penetrating into ACM. 

 Thermal system ACM - A material containing more than 1 percent asbestos 
applied to pipes, fittings, boilers, breeching, tanks, ducts, or other 
structural components to prevent heat loss or gain. 

 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) - A microscopy method that can 
identify and count asbestos fibers. 

 VA Professional Industrial Hygienist (VPIH/CIH) – The Department of 
Veterans Affairs Professional Industrial Hygienist must meet the 
qualifications of a PIH, and may be a Certified Industrial Hygienist 
(CIH). 

 VA Representative - The VA official responsible for on-going project 
work. 

 Visible emissions - Any emissions, which are visually detectable 
without the aid of instruments, coming from ACM/PACM/RACM/ACS or ACM 
waste material. 

 Waste/Equipment decontamination facility (W/EDF) – The area in which 
equipment is decontaminated before removal from the regulated area. 

 Waste generator - Any owner or operator whose act or process produces 
asbestos-containing waste material. 

 Waste shipment record - The shipping document, required to be 
originated and signed by the waste generator, used to track and 
substantiate the disposition of asbestos-containing waste material. 

 Wet cleaning - The process of thoroughly eliminating, by wet methods, 
any asbestos contamination from surfaces or objects. 

 

1.4.3 REFERENCED STANDARDS ORGANIZATIONS 

 The following acronyms or abbreviations as referenced in 
contract/specification documents are defined to mean the associated 
names. Names and addresses may be subject to change. 

 

A. VA Department of Veterans Affairs 
810 Vermont Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20420 


 

B. AIHA American Industrial Hygiene Association 
2700 Prosperity Avenue, Suite 250 
Fairfax, VA 22031 
703-849-8888 


 

C. ANSI American National Standards Institute 
1430 Broadway 
New York, NY 10018 
212-354-3300 


 

D. ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials 
1916 Race St. 
Philadelphia, PA 19103 
215-299-5400 


 

E. CFR Code of Federal Regulations 
Government Printing Office 
Washington, DC 20420 



 

F. CGA Compressed Gas Association 
1235 Jefferson Davis Highway 
Arlington, VA 22202 
703-979-0900 


 

G. CS Commercial Standard of the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) 
U. S. Department of Commerce 
Government Printing Office 
Washington, DC 20420 


 

H. EPA Environmental Protection Agency 
401 M St., SW 
Washington, DC 20460 
202-382-3949 


 

I. MIL-STD Military Standards/Standardization Division 
Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense 
Washington, DC 20420 


 

J. NIST National Institute for Standards and Technology 
U. S. Department of Commerce 
Gaithersburg, MD 20234 
301-921-1000 

 

K. NEC National Electrical Code (by NFPA) 

 

L. NEMA National Electrical Manufacturer's Association 
2101 L Street, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20037 

 

M. NFPA National Fire Protection Association 
1 Batterymarch Park 
P.O. Box 9101 
Quincy, MA 02269-9101 
800-344-3555 

 

N. NIOSH National Institutes for Occupational Safety and Health 
4676 Columbia Parkway 
Cincinnati, OH 45226 
513-533-8236 

 

O. OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
U.S. Department of Labor 
Government Printing Office 
Washington, DC 20402 

 

P. UL Underwriters Laboratory 
333 Pfingsten Rd. 
Northbrook, IL 60062 
312-272-8800 

 


1.5 APPLICABLE CODES AND REGULATIONS 

1.5.1 GENERAL APPLICABILITY OF CODES, REGULATIONS, AND STANDARDS 

A. All work under this contract shall be done in strict accordance with 
all applicable Federal, State, and local regulations, standards and 
codes governing asbestos abatement, and any other trade work done in 
conjunction with the abatement. All applicable codes, regulations and 
standards are adopted into this specification and will have the same 
force and effect as this specification. 

B. The most recent edition of any relevant regulation, standard, document 
or code shall be in effect. Where conflict among the requirements or 
with these specifications exists, the most stringent requirement(s) 
shall be utilized. 

C. Copies of all standards, regulations, codes and other applicable 
documents, including this specification and those listed in Section 1.5 
shall be available at the worksite in the clean change area of the 
worker decontamination system. 

 

1.5.2 ASBESTOS ABATEMENT CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY 

 The Asbestos Abatement Contractor (Contractor) shall assume full 
responsibility and liability for compliance with all applicable 
Federal, State and Local regulations related to any and all aspects of 
the asbestos abatement project. The Contractor is responsible for 
providing and maintaining training, accreditations, medical exams, 
medical records, personal protective equipment (PPE) including 
respiratory protection including respirator fit testing, as required by 
applicable Federal, State and Local regulations. The Contractor shall 
hold the VA and VPIH/CIH consultants harmless for any Contractor’s 
failure to comply with any applicable work, packaging, transporting, 
disposal, safety, health, or environmental requirement on the part of 
himself, his employees, or his subcontractors. The Contractor will 
incur all costs of the CPIH/CIH, including all sampling/analytical 
costs to assure compliance with OSHA/EPA/State requirements related to 
failure to comply with the regulations applicable to the work. 

 

1.5.3 FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS 

 Federal requirements which govern of asbestos abatement include, but 
are not limited to, the following regulations. 

A. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 

1. Title 29 CFR 1926.1101 - Construction Standard for Asbestos 

2. Title 29 CFR 1910 Subpart I - Personal Protective Equipment 

3. Title 29 CFR 1910.134 - Respiratory Protection 

4. Title 29 CFR 1926 - Construction Industry Standards 

5. Title 29 CFR 1910.1020 - Access to Employee Exposure and Medical 
Records 

6. Title 29 CFR 1910.1200 - Hazard Communication 

7. Title 29 CFR 1910 Subpart K - Medical and First Aid 

B. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): 

1. 40 CFR 61 Subpart A and M (Revised Subpart B) - National Emission 
Standard for Hazardous Air Pollutants - Asbestos. 

2. 40 CFR 763.80 - Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act (AHERA) 

C. Department of Transportation (DOT) 

 Title 49 CFR 100 - 185 – Transportation 

 


1.5.4 STATE REQUIREMENTS 

 State requirements that apply to the asbestos abatement work, disposal, 
clearance, etc., include, but are not limited to, the following: 

 

 Arkansas Pollution Control and Ecology Commission Regulation 21 – 
Arkansas Asbestos Abatement Regulation (2011) 

 

 

1.5.5 STANDARDS 

A. Standards which govern asbestos abatement activities include, but are 
not limited to, the following: 

1. American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Z9.2-79 - Fundamentals 
Governing the Design and Operation of Local Exhaust Systems and ANSI 
Z88.2 - Practices for Respiratory Protection. 

2. Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 586-90 - UL Standard for Safety of 
HEPA Filter Units, 7th Edition. 

B. Standards which govern encapsulation work include, but are not limited 
to the following: 

1. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 

C. Standards which govern the fire and safety concerns in abatement work 
include, but are not limited to, the following: 

1. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 241 - Standard for 
Safeguarding Construction, Alteration, and Demolition Operations. 

2. NFPA 701 - Standard Methods for Fire Tests for Flame Resistant 
Textiles and Film. 

3. NFPA 101 - Life Safety Code 

 

1.5.6 EPA GUIDANCE DOCUMENTS 

A. EPA guidance documents which discuss asbestos abatement work activities 
are listed below. These documents are made part of this section by 
reference. EPA publications can be ordered from (800) 424-9065. 

B. Guidance for Controlling ACM in Buildings (Purple Book) EPA 560/5-85- 
024 

C. Asbestos Waste Management Guidance EPA 530-SW-85-007 

D. A Guide to Respiratory Protection for the Asbestos Abatement Industry 
EPA-560-OPTS-86-001 

E. Guide to Managing Asbestos in Place (Green Book) TS 799 20T July 1990 

 

1.5.7 NOTICES 

A. State and Local agencies: Send written notification as required by 
state and local regulations including the local fire department prior 
to beginning any work. 

B. Copies of notifications shall be submitted to the VA for the facility's 
records in the same time frame notification are given to EPA, State, 
and Local authorities. 

 

1.5.8 PERMITS/LICENSES 

A. The contractor shall apply for and have all required permits and 
licenses to perform asbestos abatement work as required by Federal, 
State, and Local regulations. 

 

 Contractor shall be licensed by the Arkansas Department of 
Environmental Quality (ADEQ) to perform asbestos abatement. 

 


 Arkansas Department of Environmental Quality – Notice of Intent (NOI) 
for regulated asbestos abatement projects. 

 

1.5.9 POSTING AND FILING OF REGULATIONS 

A. Maintain two (2) copies of applicable federal, state, and local 
regulations. Post one copy of each in the clean room at the regulated 
area where workers will have daily access to the regulations and keep 
another copy in the Contractor's office. 

 

1.5.10 VA RESPONSIBILITIES 

 Prior to commencement of work: 

 

A. Notify occupants adjacent to regulated areas of project dates and 
requirements for relocation, if needed. Arrangements must be made prior 
to starting work for relocation of desks, files, equipment and personal 
possessions to avoid unauthorized access into the regulated area. Note: 
Notification of adjacent personnel is required by OSHA in 29 CFR 
1926.1101 (k) to prevent unnecessary or unauthorized access to the 
regulated area. 

B. Submit to the Contractor results of background air sampling; including 
location of samples, person who collected the samples, equipment 
utilized, calibration data and method of analysis. During abatement, 
submit to the Contractor, results of bulk material analysis and air 
sampling data collected during the course of the abatement. This 
information shall not release the Contractor from any responsibility for 
OSHA compliance. 

 

1.5.11 EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN AND ARRANGEMENTS 

A. An Emergency Action Plan shall be developed prior to commencing 
abatement activities and shall be agreed to by the Contractor and the 
VA. The Plan shall meet the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.38 (a);(b). 

B. Emergency procedures shall be in written form and prominently posted in 
the clean room and equipment room of the decontamination unit. 
Everyone, prior to entering the regulated area, must read and sign 
these procedures to acknowledge understanding of the regulated area 
layout, location of emergency exits and emergency procedures. 

C. Emergency planning shall include written notification of police, fire, 
and emergency medical personnel of planned abatement activities; work 
schedule; layout of regulated area; and access to the regulated area, 
particularly barriers that may affect response capabilities. 

D. Emergency planning shall include consideration of fire, explosion, 
hazardous atmospheres, electrical hazards, slips/trips and falls, 
confined spaces, and heat stress illness. Written procedures for 
response to emergency situations shall be developed and employee 
training in procedures shall be provided. 

E. Employees shall be trained in regulated area/site evacuation procedures 
in the event of workplace emergencies. 

1. For non life-threatening situations - employees injured or otherwise 
incapacitated shall decontaminate following normal procedures with 
assistance from fellow workers, if necessary, before exiting the 
regulated area to obtain proper medical treatment. 

2. For life-threatening injury or illness, worker decontamination shall 
take least priority after measures to stabilize the injured worker, 
remove them from the regulated area, and secure proper medical 
treatment. 


F. Telephone numbers of any/all emergency response personnel shall be 
prominently posted in the clean room, along with the location of the 
nearest telephone. 

G. The Contractor shall provide verification of first aid/CPR training for 
personnel responsible for providing first aid/CPR. OSHA requires 
medical assistance within 3-4 minutes of a life-threatening 
injury/illness. Bloodborne Pathogen training shall also be verified for 
those personnel required to provide first aid/CPR. 

H. The Emergency Action Plan shall provide for a Contingency Plan in the 
event that an incident occurs that may require the modification of the 
standard operating procedures during abatement. Such incidents include, 
but are not limited to, fire; accident; power failure; negative 
pressure failure; and supplied air system failure. The Contractor shall 
detail procedures to be followed in the event of an incident assuring 
that asbestos abatement work is stopped and wetting is continued until 
correction of the problem. 

 

1.5.12 PRE-CONSTRUCTION MEETING 

 Prior to commencing the work, the Contractor shall meet with the VA 
Certified Industrial Hygienist (VPCIH) to present and review, as 
appropriate, the items following this paragraph. The Contractor's 
Competent Person(s) who will be on-site shall participate in the prestart 
meeting. The pre-start meeting is to discuss and determine 
procedures to be used during the project. At this meeting, the 
Contractor shall provide: 

 

A. Proof of Contractor licensing. 

B. Proof the Competent Person(s) is trained and accredited and approved for 
working in this State. Verification of the experience of the Competent 
Person(s) shall also be presented. 

C. A list of all workers who will participate in the project, including 
experience and verification of training and accreditation. 

D. A list of and verification of training for all personnel who have current 
first-aid/CPR training. A minimum of one person per shift must have 
adequate training. 

E. Current medical written opinions for all personnel working on-site 
meeting the requirements of 29 CFR 1926.1101 (m). 

F. Current fit-tests for all personnel wearing respirators on-site meeting 
the requirements of 29 CFR 1926.1101 (h) and Appendix C. 

G. A copy of the Contractor's Asbestos Hazard Abatement Plan. In these 
procedures, the following information must be detailed, specific for 
this project. 

1. Regulated area preparation procedures; 

2. Notification requirements procedure of Contractor as required in 29 
CFR 1926.1101 (d); 

3. Decontamination area set-up/layout and decontamination procedures 
for employees; 

4. Abatement methods/procedures and equipment to be used; 

5. Personal protective equipment to be used; 

H. At this meeting the Contractor shall provide all submittals as 
required. 

I. Procedures for handling, packaging and disposal of asbestos waste. 

J. Emergency Action Plan and Contingency Plan Procedures. 

 


1.6 PROJECT COORDINATION 

 The following are the minimum administrative and supervisory personnel 
necessary for coordination of the work. 

 

1.6.1 PERSONNEL 

A. Administrative and supervisory personnel shall consist of a qualified 
Competent Person(s) as defined by OSHA in the Construction Standards 
and the Asbestos Construction Standard; Contractor Professional 
Industrial Hygienist and Industrial Hygiene Technicians. These 
employees are the Contractor's representatives responsible for 
compliance with these specifications and all other applicable 
requirements. 

B. Non-supervisory personnel shall consist of an adequate number of 
qualified personnel to meet the schedule requirements of the project. 
Personnel shall meet required qualifications. Personnel utilized onsite 
shall be pre-approved by the VA representative. A request for 
approval shall be submitted for any person to be employed during the 
project giving the person's name; social security number; 
qualifications; accreditation card with color picture; Certificate of 
Worker's Acknowledgment; and Affidavit of Medical Surveillance and 
Respiratory Protection and current Respirator Fit Test. 

C. Minimum qualifications for Contractor and assigned personnel are: 

1. The Contractor has conducted within the last three (3) years, three 
(3) projects of similar complexity and dollar value as this project; 
has not been cited and penalized for serious violations of federal 
(and state as applicable) EPA and OSHA asbestos regulations in the 
past three (3) years; has adequate liability/occurrence insurance 
for asbestos work as required by the state; is licensed in 
applicable states; has adequate and qualified personnel available to 
complete the work; has comprehensive standard operating procedures 
for asbestos work; has adequate materials, equipment and supplies to 
perform the work. 

2. The Competent Person has four (4) years of abatement experience of 
which two (2) years were as the Competent Person on the project; 
meets the OSHA definition of a Competent Person; has been the 
Competent Person on two (2) projects of similar size and complexity 
as this project within the past three (3) years; has completed EPA 
AHERA/OSHA/State/Local training requirements/accreditation(s) and 
refreshers; and has all required OSHA documentation related to 
medical and respiratory protection. 

3. The Contractor Professional Industrial Hygienist/CIH (CPIH/CIH) 
shall have five (5) years of monitoring experience and supervision 
of asbestos abatement projects; has participated as senior IH on 
five (5) abatement projects, three (3) of which are similar in size 
and complexity as this project; has developed at least one complete 
standard operating procedure for asbestos abatement; has trained 
abatement personnel for three (3) years; has specialized EPA 
AHERA/OSHA training in asbestos abatement management, respiratory 
protection, waste disposal and asbestos inspection; has completed 
the NIOSH 582 Course or equivalent, Contractor/Supervisor course; 
and has appropriate medical/respiratory protection 
records/documentation. 

4. The Abatement Personnel shall have completed the EPA AHERA/OSHA 
abatement worker course; have training on the standard operating 
procedures of the Contractor; has one year of asbestos abatement 
experience within the past three (3) years of similar size and 


complexity; has applicable medical and respiratory protection 
documentation; has certificate of training/current refresher and 
State accreditation/license. 

 

All personnel should be in compliance with OSHA construction safety 
training as applicable and submit certification. 

 

1.7 RESPIRATORY PROTECTION 

1.7.1 GENERAL - RESPIRATORY PROTECTION PROGRAM 

 The Contractor shall develop and implement a written Respiratory 
Protection Program (RPP) which is in compliance with the January 8, 
1998 OSHA requirements found at 29 CFR 1926.1101 and 29 CFR 
1910.Subpart I;134. ANSI Standard Z88.2-1992 provides excellent 
guidance for developing a respiratory protection program. All 
respirators used must be NIOSH approved for asbestos abatement 
activities. The written RPP shall, at a minimum, contain the basic 
requirements found at 29 CFR 1910.134 (c)(1)(i - ix) - Respiratory 
Protection Program. 

 

1.7.2 RESPIRATORY PROTECTION PROGRAM COORDINATOR 

 The Respiratory Protection Program Coordinator (RPPC) must be 
identified and shall have two (2) years experience coordinating RPP of 
similar size and complexity. The RPPC must submit a signed statement 
attesting to the fact that the program meets the above requirements. 

 

1.7.3 SELECTION AND USE OF RESPIRATORS 

 The procedure for the selection and use of respirators must be 
submitted to the VA as part of the Contractor's qualifications. The 
procedure must written clearly enough for workers to understand. A copy 
of the Respiratory Protection Program must be available in the clean room 
of the decontamination unit for reference by employees or authorized 
visitors. 

 

1.7.4 MINIMUM RESPIRATORY PROTECTION 

 Minimum respiratory protection shall be a full face powered air 
purifying respirator when fiber levels are maintained consistently at 
or below 0.5 f/cc. A higher level of respiratory protection may be 
provided or required, depending on fiber levels. Respirator selection 
shall meet the requirements of 29 CFR 1926.1101 (h); Table 1, except as 
indicated in this paragraph. Abatement personnel must have a respirator 
for their exclusive use. 

 

1.7.5 MEDICAL WRITTEN OPINION 

 No employee shall be allowed to wear a respirator unless a physician or 
other licensed health care professional has provided a written 
determination they are medically qualified to wear the class of 
respirator to be used on the project while wearing whole body 
impermeable garments and subjected to heat or cold stress. 

 

1.7.6 RESPIRATOR FIT TEST 

 All personnel wearing respirators shall have a current 
qualitative/quantitative fit test which was conducted in accordance 


with 29 CFR 1910.134 (f) and Appendix A. Quantitative fit tests shall 
be done for PAPRs which have been put into a motor/blower failure mode. 

 

1.7.7 RESPIRATOR FIT CHECK 

 The Competent Person shall assure that the positive/negative pressure 
user seal check is done each time the respirator is donned by an 
employee. Head coverings must cover respirator head straps. Any 
situation that prevents an effective facepiece to face seal as 
evidenced by failure of a user seal check shall preclude that person 
from wearing a respirator inside the regulated area until resolution of 
the problem. 

 

1.7.8 MAINTENANCE AND CARE OF RESPIRATORS 

 The Respiratory Protection Program Coordinator shall submit evidence 
and documentation showing compliance with 29 CFR 1910.134 (h) 
Maintenance and Care of Respirators. 

 

1.7.9 SUPPLIED AIR SYSTEMS 

 If a supplied air system is used, the system shall meet all 
requirements of 29 CFR 1910.134 and the ANSI/Compressed Gas Association 
(CGA) Commodity Specification for Air current requirements for Type 1 - 
Grade D breathing air. Low pressure systems are not allowed to be used 
on asbestos abatement projects. Supplied Air respirator use shall be in 
accordance with EPA/NIOSH publication EPA-560-OPTS-86-001 "A Guide to 
Respiratory Protection for the Asbestos Abatement Industry". The 
competent person on site will be responsible for the supplied air 
system to ensure the safety of the worker. 

 

1.8 WORKER PROTECTION 

1.8.1 TRAINING OF ABATEMENT PERSONNEL 

 Prior to beginning any abatement activity, all personnel shall be 
trained in accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 1926.1101 (k)(9) and any 
additional State/Local requirements. Training must include, at a 
minimum, the elements listed at 29 CFR 1926.1101 (k)(9)(viii). Training 
shall have been conducted by a third party, EPA/State approved trainer 
meeting the requirements of EPA 40 CFR 763 Appendix C (AHERA MAP). 
Initial training certificates and current refresher and accreditation 
proof must be submitted for each person working at the site. 

 

1.8.2 MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS 

 Medical examinations meeting the requirements of 29 CFR 1926.1101 (m) 
shall be provided for all personnel working in the regulated area, 
regardless of exposure levels. A current physician's written opinion as 
required by 29 CFR 1926.1101 (m)(4) shall be provided for each person 
and shall include in the medical opinion the person has been evaluated 
for working in a heat and cold stress environment while wearing 
personal protective equipment (PPE) and is able to perform the work 
without risk of material health impairment. 

 

1.8.3 REGULATED AREA ENTRY PROCEDURE 

 The Competent Person shall ensure that each time workers enter the 
regulated area; they remove ALL street clothes in the clean room of the 
decontamination unit and put on new disposable coveralls, head 


coverings, a clean respirator, and then proceed through the shower room 
to the equipment room where they put on non-disposable required 
personal protective equipment. 

 

1.8.4 DECONTAMINATION PROCEDURE 

 The Competent Person shall require all personnel to adhere to following 
decontamination procedures whenever they leave the regulated area. 

A. When exiting the regulated area, remove disposable coveralls, and ALL 
other clothes, disposable head coverings, and foot coverings or boots 
in the equipment room. 

B. Still wearing the respirator and completely naked, proceed to the 
shower. Showering is MANDATORY. Care must be taken to follow reasonable 
procedures in removing the respirator to avoid inhaling asbestos fibers 
while showering. The following procedure is required as a minimum: 

1. Thoroughly wet body including hair and face. If using a PAPR hold 
blower above head to keep filters dry. 

2. With respirator still in place, thoroughly decontaminate body, hair, 
respirator face piece, and all other parts of the respirator except 
the blower and battery pack on a PAPR. Pay particular attention to 
cleaning the seal between the face and respirator facepiece and 
under the respirator straps. 

3. Take a deep breath, hold it and/or exhale slowly, completely wetting 
hair, face, and respirator. While still holding breath, remove the 
respirator and hold it away from the face before starting to 
breathe. 

C. Carefully decontaminate the facepiece of the respirator inside and out. 
If using a PAPR, shut down using the following sequence: a) first cap 
inlets to filters; b) turn blower off to keep debris collected on the 
inlet side of the filter from dislodging and contaminating the outside 
of the unit; c) thoroughly decontaminate blower and hoses; d) carefully 
decontaminate battery pack with a wet rag being cautious of getting 
water in the battery pack thus preventing destruction. (THIS PROCEDURE 
IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR RESPIRATOR CLEANING!) 

D. Shower and wash body completely with soap and water. Rinse thoroughly. 

E. Rinse shower room walls and floor to drain prior to exiting. 

F. Proceed from shower to clean room; dry off and change into street 
clothes or into new disposable work clothing. 

 

1.8.5 REGULATED AREA REQUIREMENTS 

 The Competent Person shall meet all requirements of 29 CFR 1926.1101 
(o) and assure that all requirements for regulated areas at 29 CFR 
1926.1101 (e) are met. All personnel in the regulated area shall not be 
allowed to eat, drink, smoke, chew tobacco or gum, apply cosmetics, or 
in any way interfere with the fit of their respirator. 

 

1.9 DECONTAMINATION FACILITIES 

1.9.1 DESCRIPTION 

 Provide each regulated area with separate personnel decontamination 
facilities (PDF) and waste/equipment decontamination facilities 
(W/EDF). Ensure that the PDF are the only means of ingress and egress 
to the regulated area and that all equipment, bagged waste, and other 
material exit the regulated area only through the W/EDF. 

 


1.9.2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

 All personnel entering or exiting a regulated area must go through the 
PDF and shall follow the requirements at 29 CFR 1926.1101 (j)(1) and 
these specifications. All waste, equipment and contaminated materials 
must exit the regulated area through the W/EDF and be decontaminated in 
accordance with these specifications. Walls and ceilings of the PDF and 
W/EDF must be constructed of a minimum of 3 layers of 6 mil opaque fire 
retardant polyethylene sheeting and be securely attached to existing 
building components and/or an adequate temporary framework. A minimum of 
3 layers of 6 mil poly shall also be used to cover the floor under the 
PDF and W/EDF units. Construct doors so that they overlap and secure to 
adjacent surfaces. Weight inner doorway sheets with layers of duct tape 
so that they close quickly after release. Put arrows on sheets so they 
show direction of travel and overlap. If the building adjacent area is 
occupied, construct a solid barrier on the occupied side(s) to protect 
the sheeting and reduce potential for non-authorized personnel entering 
the regulated area. 

 

1.9.3 TEMPORARY FACILITIES TO THE PDF AND W/EDF 

 The Competent Person shall provide temporary water service connections 
to the PDF and W/EDF. Backflow prevention must be provided at the point 
of connection to the VA system. Water supply must be of adequate 
pressure and meet requirements of 29 CFR 1910.141(d)(3). Provide 
adequate temporary overhead electric power with ground fault circuit 
interruption (GFCI) protection. Provide a sub-panel equipped with GFCI 
protection for all temporary power in the clean room. Provide adequate 
lighting to provide a minimum of 50 foot candles in the PDF and W/EDF. 
Provide temporary heat, if needed, to maintain 70oF throughout the PDF 
and W/EDF. 

 

1.9.4 PERSONNEL DECONTAMINATION FACILITY (PDF) 

 The Competent Person shall provide a PDF consisting of shower room 
which is contiguous to a clean room and equipment room which is 
connected to the regulated area. The PDF must be sized to accommodate 
the number of personnel scheduled for the project. The shower room, 
located in the center of the PDF, shall be fitted with as many portable 
showers as necessary to insure all employees can complete the entire 
decontamination procedure within 15 minutes. The PDF shall be 
constructed of opaque poly for privacy. The PDF shall be constructed to 
eliminate any parallel routes of egress without showering. 

1. Clean Room: The clean room must be physically and visually separated 
from the rest of the building to protect the privacy of personnel 
changing clothes. The clean room shall be constructed of at least 3 
layers of 6 mil opaque fire retardant poly to provide an air tight 
room. Provide a minimum of 2 - 900 mm (3 foot) wide 6 mil poly 
opaque fire retardant doorways. One doorway shall be the entry from 
outside the PDF and the second doorway shall be to the shower room 
of the PDF. The floor of the clean room shall be maintained in a 
clean, dry condition. Shower overflow shall not be allowed into the 
clean room. Provide 1 storage locker per person. A portable fire 
extinguisher, minimum 10 pounds capacity, Type ABC, shall be 
provided in accordance with OSHA and NFPA Standard 10. All persons 
entering the regulated area shall remove all street clothing in the 
clean room and dress in disposable protective clothing and 
respiratory protection. Any person entering the clean room does so 


either from the outside with street clothing on or is coming from 
the shower room completely naked and thoroughly washed. Females 
required to enter the regulated area shall be ensured of their 
privacy throughout the entry/exit process by posting guards at both 
entry points to the PDF so no male can enter or exit the PDF during 
her stay in the PDF. 

2. Shower Room: The Competent Person shall assure that the shower room 
is a completely water tight compartment to be used for the movement 
of all personnel from the clean room to the equipment room and for 
the showering of all personnel going from the equipment room to the 
clean room. Each shower shall be constructed so water runs down the 
walls of the shower and into a drip pan. Install a freely draining 
smooth floor on top of the shower pan. The shower room shall be 
separated from the rest of the building and from the clean room and 
equipment room using air tight walls made from at least 3 layers of 
6 mil opaque fire retardant poly. The shower shall be equipped with 
a shower head and controls, hot and cold water, drainage, soap dish 
and continuous supply of soap, and shall be maintained in a sanitary 
condition throughout its use. The controls shall be arranged so an 
individual can shower without assistance. Provide a flexible hose 
shower head, hose bibs and all other items shown on Shower 
Schematic. Waste water will be pumped to a drain after being 
filtered through a minimum of a 100 micron sock in the shower drain; 
a 20 micron filter; and a final 5 micron filter. Filters will be 
changed a minimum of daily or more often as needed. Filter changes 
must be done in the shower to prevent loss of contaminated water. 
Hose down all shower surfaces after each shift and clean any debris 
from the shower pan. Residue is to be disposed of as asbestos waste. 

3. Equipment Room: The Competent Person shall provide an equipment room 
which shall be an air tight compartment for the storage of work 
equipment/tools, reusable personal protective equipment, except for 
a respirator and for use as a gross decontamination area for 
personnel exiting the regulated area. The equipment room shall be 
separated from the regulated area by a minimum 3 foot wide door made 
with 2 layers of 6 mil opaque fire retardant poly. The equipment 
room shall be separated from the regulated area, the shower room and 
the rest of the building by air tight walls and ceiling constructed 
of a minimum of 3 layers of 6 mil opaque fire retardant poly. Damp 
wipe all surfaces of the equipment room after each shift change. 
Provide an additional loose layer of 6 mil fire retardant poly per 
shift change and remove this layer after each shift. If needed, 
provide a temporary electrical sub-panel equipped with GFCI in the 
equipment room to accommodate any equipment required in the 
regulated area. 

4. The PDF shall be as follows: Clean room at the entrance followed by 
a shower room followed by an equipment room leading to the regulated 
area. Each doorway in the PDF shall be a minimum of 2 layers of 6 
mil opaque fire retardant poly. 

 


 

 

1.9.5 WASTE/EQUIPMENT DECONTAMINATION FACILITY (W/EDF) 

 The Competent Person shall provide an W/EDF consisting of a wash room, 
holding room, and clean room for removal of waste, equipment and 
contaminated material from the regulated area. Personnel shall not 
enter or exit the W/EDF except in the event of an emergency. Clean 
debris and residue in the W/EDF daily. All surfaces in the W/EDF shall 
be wiped/hosed down after each shift and all debris shall be cleaned 
from the shower pan. The W/EDF shall consist of the following: 

1. Wash Down Station: Provide an enclosed shower unit in the regulated 
area just outside the Wash Room as an equipment bag and container 
cleaning station. 

2. Wash Room: Provide a wash room for cleaning of bagged or 
containerized asbestos containing waste materials passed from the 
regulated area. Construct the wash room using 50 x 100 mm (2" x 4") 
wood framing and 3 layers of 6 mil fire retardant poly. Locate the 
wash room so that packaged materials, after being wiped clean, can 
be passed to the Holding Room. Doorways in the wash room shall be 
constructed of 2 layers of 6 mil fire retardant poly. 

3. Holding Room: Provide a holding room as a drop location for bagged 
materials passed from the wash room. Construct the holding room 
using 50 x 100 mm (2" x 4") wood framing and 3 layers of 6 mil fire 
retardant poly. The holding room shall be located so that bagged 
material cannot be passed from the wash room to the clean room 
unless it goes through the holding room. Doorways in the holding 
room shall be constructed of 2 layers of 6 mil fire retardant poly. 

4. Clean Room: Provide a clean room to isolate the holding room from 
the exterior of the regulated area. Construct the clean room using 2 
x 4 wood framing and 2 layers of 6 mil fire retardant poly. The 
clean room shall be located so as to provide access to the holding 
room from the building exterior. Doorways to the clean room shall be 
constructed of 2 layers of 6 mil fire retardant poly. When a 
negative pressure differential system is used, a rigid enclosure 
separation between the W/EDF clean room and the adjacent areas shall 
be provided. 

5. The W/EDF shall be as follows: Wash Room leading to a Holding Room 
followed by a Clean Room leading to outside the regulated area. See 
diagram. 


 

 

1.9.6 WASTE/EQUIPMENT DECONTAMINATION PROCEDURES 

 At the washdown station in the regulated area, thoroughly wet clean 
contaminated equipment and/or sealed polyethylene bags and pass into 
Wash Room after visual inspection. When passing anything into the Wash 
Room, close all doorways of the W/EDF, other than the doorway between 
the washdown station and the Wash Room. Keep all outside personnel 
clear of the W/EDF. Once inside the Wash Room, wet clean the equipment 
and/or bags. After cleaning and inspection, pass items into the Holding 
Room. Close all doorways except the doorway between the Holding Room 
and the Clean Room. Workers from the Clean Room/Exterior shall enter 
the Holding Room and remove the decontaminated/cleaned equipment/bags 
for removal and disposal. These personnel will not be required to wear 
PPE. At no time shall personnel from the clean side be allowed to enter 
the Wash Room. 

 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT 

2.1 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT 

2.1.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

 Prior to the start of work, the contractor shall provide and maintain a 
sufficient quantity of materials and equipment to assure continuous and 
efficient work throughout the duration of the project. Work shall not 
start unless the following items have been delivered to the site and 
the CPIH/CIH has submitted verification to the VA's representative. 

A. All materials shall be delivered in their original package, container 
or bundle bearing the name of the manufacturer and the brand name 
(where applicable). 

B. Store all materials subject to damage off the ground, away from wet or 
damp surfaces and under cover sufficient enough to prevent damage or 
contamination. Flammable and combustible materials cannot be stored 
inside buildings. Replacement materials shall be stored outside of the 
regulated area until abatement is completed. 

C. The Contractor shall not block or hinder use of buildings by patients, 
staff, and visitors to the VA in partially occupied buildings by 
placing materials/equipment in any unauthorized location. 

D. The Competent Person shall inspect for damaged, deteriorating or 
previously used materials. Such materials shall not be used and shall 
be removed from the worksite and disposed of properly. 

E. Polyethylene sheeting for walls in the regulated area shall be a 
minimum of 4-mils. For floors and all other uses, sheeting of at least 
6-mil shall be used in widths selected to minimize the frequency of 
joints. Fire retardant poly shall be used throughout. 


F. The method of attaching polyethylene sheeting shall be agreed upon in 
advance by the Contractor and the VA and selected to minimize damage to 
equipment and surfaces. Method of attachment may include any 
combination of moisture resistant duct tape furring strips, spray glue, 
staples, nails, screws, lumber and plywood for enclosures or other 
effective procedures capable of sealing polyethylene to dissimilar 
finished or unfinished surfaces under both wet and dry conditions. 

G. Polyethylene sheeting utilized for the PDF shall be opaque white or 
black in color, 6 mil fire retardant poly. 

H. Installation and plumbing hardware, showers, hoses, drain pans, sump 
pumps and waste water filtration system shall be provided by the 
Contractor. 

I. An adequate number of HEPA vacuums, scrapers, sprayers, nylon brushes, 
brooms, disposable mops, rags, sponges, staple guns, shovels, ladders 
and scaffolding of suitable height and length as well as meeting OSHA 
requirements, fall protection devices, water hose to reach all areas in 
the regulated area, airless spray equipment, and any other tools, 
materials or equipment required to conduct the abatement project. All 
electrically operated hand tools, equipment, electric cords shall be 
connected to GFCI protection. 

J. Special protection for objects in the regulated area shall be detailed 
(e.g., plywood over carpeting or hardwood floors to prevent damage from 
scaffolds, water and falling material). 

K. Disposal bags – 2 layers of 6 mil poly for asbestos waste shall be preprinted 
with labels, markings and address as required by OSHA, EPA and 
DOT regulations. 

L. The VA shall be provided an advance copy of the MSDS as required for 
all hazardous chemicals under OSHA 29 CFR 1910.1200 - Hazard 
Communication in the pre-start meeting submittal. Chlorinated compounds 
shall not be used with any spray adhesive, mastic remover or other 
product. Appropriate encapsulant(s) shall be provided. 

M. OSHA DANGER demarcation signs, as many and as required by OSHA 29 CFR 
1926.1101(k)(7) shall be provided and placed by the Competent Person. 
All other posters and notices required by Federal and State regulations 
shall be posted in the Clean Room. 

N. Adequate and appropriate PPE for the project and number of 
personnel/shifts shall be provided. All personal protective equipment 
issued must be based on a written hazard assessment conducted under 29 
CFR 1910.132(d). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


2.2 MONITORING, INSPECTION AND TESTING 

2.2.1 GENERAL 

A. Perform throughout abatement work monitoring, inspection and testing 
inside and around the regulated area in accordance with the OSHA 
requirements and these specifications. OSHA requires that the employee 
exposure to asbestos must not exceed 0.1 fiber per cubic centimeter 
(f/cc) of air, averaged over an 8-hour work shift. The CPIH/CIH is 
responsible for and shall inspect and oversee the performance of the 
Contractor IH Technician. The IH Technician shall continuously inspect 
and monitor conditions inside the regulated area to ensure compliance 
with these specifications. In addition, the CPIH/CIH shall personally 
manage air sample collection, analysis, and evaluation for personnel, 
regulated area, and adjacent area samples to satisfy OSHA requirements. 
Additional inspection and testing requirements are also indicated in 
other parts of this specification. 

B. The VA will employ an independent industrial hygienist (VPIH/CIH) 
consultant and/or use its own IH to perform various services on behalf 
of the VA. The VPIH/CIH will perform the necessary monitoring, 
inspection, testing, and other support services to ensure that VA 
patients, employees, and visitors will not be adversely affected by the 
abatement work, and that the abatement work proceeds in accordance with 
these specifications, that the abated areas or abated buildings have 
been successfully decontaminated. The work of the VPIH/CIH consultant 
in no way relieves the Contractor from their responsibility to perform 
the work in accordance with contract/specification requirements, to 
perform continuous inspection, monitoring and testing for the safety of 
their employees, and to perform other such services as specified. The 
cost of the VPIH/CIH and their services will be borne by the VA except 
for any repeat of final inspection and testing that may be required due 
to unsatisfactory initial results. Any repeated final inspections 
and/or testing, if required, will be paid for by the Contractor. 

C. If fibers counted by the VPIH/CIH during abatement work, either inside 
or outside the regulated area, utilizing the NIOSH 7400 air monitoring 
method, exceed the specified respective limits, the Contractor shall 
stop work. The Contractor may request confirmation of the results by 
analysis of the samples by TEM. Request must be in writing and 
submitted to the VA's representative. Cost for the confirmation of 
results will be borne by the Contractor for both the collection and 
analysis of samples and for the time delay that may/does result for 
this confirmation. Confirmation sampling and analysis will be the 
responsibility of the CPIH with review and approval of the VPIH/CIH. An 
agreement between the CPIH/CIH and the VPIH/CIH shall be reached on the 
exact details of the confirmation effort, in writing, including such 
things as the number of samples, location, collection, quality control 
on-site, analytical laboratory, interpretation of results and any 
follow-up actions. This written agreement shall be co-signed by the 
IH's and delivered to the VA's representative. 

 

2.2.2 SCOPE OF SERVICES OF THE VPIH/CIH CONSULTANT 

A. The purpose of the work of the VPIH/CIH is to: assure quality; 
adherence to the specification; resolve problems; prevent the spread of 
contamination beyond the regulated area; and assure clearance at the 
end of the project. In addition, their work includes performing the 
final inspection and testing to determine whether the regulated area or 
building has been adequately decontaminated. All air monitoring is to 


be done utilizing PCM/TEM. The VPIH/CIH will perform the following 
tasks: 

1. Task 1: Establish background levels before abatement begins by 
collecting background samples. Retain samples for possible TEM 
analysis. 

2. Task 2: Perform continuous air monitoring, inspection, and testing 
outside the regulated area during actual abatement work to detect 
any faults in the regulated area isolation and any adverse impact on 
the surroundings from regulated area activities. 

3. Task 3: Perform unannounced visits to spot check overall compliance 
of work with contract/specifications. These visits may include any 
inspection, monitoring, and testing inside and outside the regulated 
area and all aspects of the operation except personnel monitoring. 

4. Task 4: Provide support to the VA representative such as evaluation 
of submittals from the Contractor, resolution of conflicts, 
interpret data, etc. 

5. Task 5: Perform, in the presence of the VA representative, final 
inspection and testing of a decontaminated regulated area at the 
conclusion of the abatement to certify compliance with all 
regulations and VA requirements/specifications. 

6. Task 6: Issue certificate of decontamination for each regulated area 
and project report. 

 

B. All documentation, inspection results and testing results generated by 
the VPIH/CIH will be available to the Contractor for information and 
consideration. The Contractor shall cooperate with and support the 
VPIH/CIH for efficient and smooth performance of their work. 

C. The monitoring and inspection results of the VPIH/CIH will be used by 
the VA to issue any Stop Removal orders to the Contractor during 
abatement work and to accept or reject a regulated area or building as 
decontaminated. 

 

2.2.3 MONITORING, INSPECTION AND TESTING BY CONTRACTOR CPIH/CIH 

 The Contractor’s CPIH/CIH is responsible for managing all monitoring, 
inspections, and testing required by these specifications, as well as 
any and all regulatory requirements adopted by these specifications. 
The CPIH/CIH is responsible for the continuous monitoring of all 
subsystems and procedures which could affect the health and safety of 
the Contractor’s personnel. Safety and health conditions and the 
provision of those conditions inside the regulated area for all persons 
entering the regulated area is the exclusive responsibility of the 
Contractor/Competent Person. The person performing the personnel and 
area air monitoring inside the regulated area shall be an IH 
Technician, who shall be trained and shall have specialized field 
experience in sampling and analysis. The IH Technician shall have 
successfully completed a NIOSH 582 Course or equivalent and provide 
documentation. The IH Technician shall participate in the AIHA Asbestos 
Analysis Registry or participate in the Proficiency Analytic Testing 
program of AIHA for fiber counting quality control assurance. The IH 
Technician shall also be an accredited EPA AHERA/State 
Contractor/Supervisor or Abatement Worker and Building Inspector. The 
IH Technician shall have participated in five abatement projects 
collecting personal and area samples as well as responsibility for 
documentation on substantially similar projects in size and scope. The 
analytic laboratory used by the Contractor to analyze the samples shall 
be AIHA accredited for asbestos PAT and approved by the VA prior to 


start of the project. A daily log shall be maintained by the CPIH/CIH 
or IH Technician, documenting all OSHA requirements for air personal 
monitoring for asbestos in 29 CFR 1926.1101(f), (g) and Appendix A. 
This log shall be made available to the VA representative and the 
VPIH/CIH upon request. The log will contain, at a minimum, information 
on personnel or area samples, other persons represented by the sample, 
the date of sample collection, start and stop times for sampling, 
sample volume, flow rate, and fibers/cc. The CPIH/CIH shall collect and 
analyze samples for each representative job being done in the regulated 
area, i.e., removal, wetting, clean-up, and load-out. No fewer than 
two personal samples per shift shall be collected and one area sample 
per 1,000 square feet of regulated area where abatement is taking place 
and one sample per shift in the clean room area shall be collected. In 
addition to the continuous monitoring required, the CPIH/CIH will 
perform inspection and testing at the final stages of abatement for 
each regulated area as specified in the CPIH/CIH responsibilities. 
Additionally, the CPIH/CIH will monitor and record pressure readings 
within the containment daily with a minimum of two readings at the 
beginning and at the end of a shift, and submit the data in the daily 
report. 

 

2.3 ASBESTOS HAZARD ABATEMENT PLAN 

 The Contractor shall have established an Asbestos Hazard Abatement Plan 
(AHAP) in printed form and loose leaf folder consisting of simplified 
text, diagrams, sketches, and pictures that establish and explain 
clearly the procedures to be followed during all phases of the work by 
the Contractor's personnel. The AHAP must be modified as needed to 
address specific requirements of this project and the specifications. 
The AHAP shall be submitted for review and approval to the VA prior to 
the start of any abatement work. The minimum topics and areas to be 
covered by the AHAPs are: 

A. Minimum Personnel Qualifications 

B. Emergency Action Plan/Contingency Plans and Arrangements 

C. Security and Safety Procedures 

D. Respiratory Protection/Personal Protective Equipment Program and 
Training 

E. Medical Surveillance Program and Recordkeeping 

F. Regulated Area Requirements - Containment Barriers/Isolation of 
Regulated Area 

G. Decontamination Facilities and Entry/Exit Procedures (PDF and W/EDF) 

H. Negative Pressure Systems Requirements 

I. Monitoring, Inspections, and Testing 

J. Removal Procedures for ACM 

K. Removal of Contaminated Soil (if applicable) 

L. Encapsulation Procedures for ACM 

M. Disposal of ACM waste/equipment 

N. Regulated Area Decontamination/Clean-up 

O. Regulated Area Visual and Air Clearance 

P. Project Completion/Closeout 

 

2.4 SUBMITTALS 

2.4.1 PRE-START MEETING SUBMITTALS 

 Submit to the VA a minimum of 14 days prior to the pre-start meeting 
the following for review and approval. Meeting this requirement is a 
prerequisite for the pre-start meeting for this project: 


A. Submit a detailed work schedule for the entire project reflecting 
contract documents and the phasing/schedule requirements from the CPM 
chart. 

B. Submit a staff organization chart showing all personnel who will be 
working on the project and their capacity/function. Provide their 
qualifications, training, accreditations, and licenses, as appropriate. 
Provide a copy of the "Certificate of Worker's Acknowledgment" and the 
"Affidavit of Medical Surveillance and Respiratory Protection" for each 
person. 

C. Submit Asbestos Hazard Abatement Plan developed specifically for this 
project, incorporating the requirements of the specifications, 
prepared, signed and dated by the CPIH/CIH. 

D. Submit the specifics of the materials and equipment to be used for this 
project with manufacturer names, model numbers, performance 
characteristics, pictures/diagrams, and number available for the 
following: 

1. Supplied air system, negative air machines, HEPA vacuums, air 
monitoring pumps, calibration devices, pressure differential 
monitoring device and emergency power generating system. 

2. Waste water filtration system, shower system, containment barriers. 

3. Encapsulants, surfactants, hand held sprayers, airless sprayers, 
glovebags, and fire extinguishers. 

4. Respirators, protective clothing, personal protective equipment. 

5. Fire safety equipment to be used in the regulated area. 

E. Submit the name, location, and phone number of the approved landfill; 
proof/verification the landfill is approved for ACM disposal; the 
landfill's requirements for ACM waste; the type of vehicle to be used 
for transportation; and name, address, and phone number of 
subcontractor, if used. Proof of asbestos training for transportation 
personnel shall be provided. 

F. Submit required notifications and arrangements made with regulatory 
agencies having regulatory jurisdiction and the specific 
contingency/emergency arrangements made with local health, fire, 
ambulance, hospital authorities and any other 
notifications/arrangements. 

G. Submit the name, location and verification of the laboratory and/or 
personnel to be used for analysis of air and/or bulk samples. Personal 
air monitoring must be done in accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 1926.1101(f) 
and Appendix A. Area or clearance air monitoring shall be conducted in 
accordance with EPA AHERA protocols. 

H. Submit qualifications verification: Submit the following evidence of 
qualifications. Make sure that all references are current and 
verifiable by providing current phone numbers and documentation. 

1. Asbestos Abatement Company: Project experience within the past 3 
years; listing projects first most similar to this project: Project 
Name; Type of Abatement; Duration; Cost; Reference Name/Phone 
Number; Final Clearance; Completion Date 

2. List of project(s) halted by owner, A/E, IH, regulatory agency in 
the last 3 years: Project Name; Reason; Date; Reference Name/Number; 
Resolution 

3. List asbestos regulatory citations (e.g., OSHA), notices of 
violations (e.g., Federal and state EPA), penalties, and legal 
actions taken against the company including and of the company’s 
officers (including damages paid) in the last 3 years. Provide 
copies and all information needed for verification. 

I. Submit information on personnel: Provide a resume; address each item 
completely; copies of certificates, accreditations, and licenses. 


Submit an affidavit signed by the CPIH/CIH stating that all personnel 
submitted below have medical records in accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 
1926.1101(m) and 29 CFR 1910.20 and that the company has implemented a 
medical surveillance program and written respiratory protection 
program, and maintains recordkeeping in accordance with the above 
regulations. Submit the phone number and doctor/clinic/hospital used 
for medical evaluations. 

1. CPIH/CIH and IH Technician: Name; years of abatement experience; 
list of projects similar to this one; certificates, licenses, 
accreditations for proof of AHERA/OSHA specialized asbestos 
training; professional affiliations; number of workers trained; 
samples of training materials; samples of AHAPs developed; medical 
opinion; and current respirator fit test. 

2. Competent Person(s)/Supervisor(s): Number; names; social security 
numbers; years of abatement experience as Competent 
Person/Supervisor; list of similar projects in size/complexity as 
Competent Person/Supervisor; as a worker; certificates, licenses, 
accreditations; proof of AHERA/OSHA specialized asbestos training; 
maximum number of personnel supervised on a project; medical opinion 
(asbestos surveillance and respirator use); and current respirator 
fit test. 

3. Workers: Numbers; names; social security numbers; years of abatement 
experience; certificates, licenses, accreditations; training courses 
in asbestos abatement and respiratory protection; medical opinion 
(asbestos surveillance and respirator use); and current respirator 
fit test. 

J. Submit copies of State license for asbestos abatement; copy of 
insurance policy, including exclusions with a letter from agent stating 
in plain language the coverage provided and the fact that asbestos 
abatement activities are covered by the policy; copy of AHAPs 
incorporating the requirements of this specification; information on 
who provides your training, how often; who provides medical 
surveillance, how often; who performs and how is personal air 
monitoring of abatement workers conducted; a list of references of 
independent laboratories/IH's familiar with your air monitoring and 
standard operating procedures; and copies of monitoring results of the 
five referenced projects listed and analytical method(s) used. 

K. Rented equipment must be decontaminated prior to returning to the 
rental agency. 

L. Submit, before the start of work, the manufacturer's technical data for 
all types of encapsulants, all MSDS and application instructions. 

 

2.4.2 SUBMITTALS DURING ABATEMENT 

A. The Competent Person shall maintain and submit a daily log at the 
regulated area documenting the dates and times of the following: 
purpose, attendees and summary of meetings; all personnel 
entering/exiting the regulated area; document and discuss the 
resolution of unusual events such as barrier breeching, equipment 
failures, emergencies, and any cause for stopping work; and 
representative air monitoring and results/TWA's/EL's. Submit this 
information daily to the VPIH/CIH. 

B. The CPIH/CIH shall document and maintain the inspection and approval of 
the regulated area preparation prior to start of work and daily during 
work. 

1. Removal of any poly barriers. 


2. Visual inspection/testing by the CPIH/CIH or IH Technician prior to 
application of lockdown encapsulant. 

3. Packaging and removal of ACM waste from regulated area. 

4. Disposal of ACM waste materials; copies of Waste Shipment 
Records/landfill receipts to the VA's representative on a weekly 
basis. 

 

2.4.3 SUBMITTALS AT COMPLETION OF ABATEMENT 

 The CPIH/CIH shall submit a project report consisting of the daily log 
book requirements and documentation of events during the abatement 
project including Waste Shipment Records signed by the landfill's 
agent. It will also include information on the containment and 
transportation of waste from the containment with applicable Chain of 
Custody forms. The report shall include a certificate of completion, 
signed and dated by the CPIH/CIH, in accordance with Attachment #1. All 
clearance and perimeter area samples must be submitted. The VA 
Representative will retain the abatement report after completion of the 
project and provide copies of the abatement report to VAMC Office of 
Engineer and the Safety Office. 

 

2.5 ENCAPSULANTS 

2.5.1 TYPES OF ENCAPSULANTS 

A. The following four types of encapsulants, if used, must comply with 
comply with performance requirements as stated in paragraph 2.6.2: 

1. Removal encapsulant - used as a wetting agent to remove ACM. 

2. Bridging encapsulant - provides a tough, durable coating on ACM. 

3. Penetrating encapsulant - penetrates/encapsulates ACM at least 13 mm 
(1/2"). 

4. Lockdown encapsulant - seals microscopic fibers on surfaces after 
ACM removal. 

 

2.5.2 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

 Encapsulants shall meet the latest requirements of EPA; shall not 
contain toxic or hazardous substances; or solvents; and shall comply 
with the following performance requirements: 

A. General Requirements for all Encapsulants: 

1. ASTM E84: Flame spread of 25; smoke emission of 50. 

2. University of Pittsburgh Protocol: Combustion Toxicity; zero 
mortality. 

3. ASTM C732: Accelerated Aging Test; Life Expectancy - 20 years. 

4. ASTM E96: Permeability - minimum of 0.4 perms. 

B. Bridging/Penetrating Encapsulants: 

1. ASTM E736: Cohesion/Adhesion Test - 24 kPa (50 lbs/ft2). 

2. ASTM E119: Fire Resistance - 3 hours (Classified by UL for use on 
fibrous/cementitious fireproofing). 

3. ASTM D2794: Gardner Impact Test; Impact Resistance - minimum 11.5 
kg-mm (43 in/lb). 

4. ASTM D522: Mandrel Bend Test; Flexibility - no rupture or cracking. 

C. Lockdown Encapsulants: 

1. ASTM E119: Fire resistance - 3 hours (tested with fireproofing over 
encapsulant applied directly to steel member). 

2. ASTM E736: Bond Strength - 48 kPa (100 lbs/ft2) (test compatibility 
with cementitious and fibrous fireproofing). 

3. In certain situations, encapsulants may have to be applied to hot 
pipes/equipment. The encapsulant must be able to withstand high 


temperatures without cracking or off-gassing any noxious vapors 
during application. 

 

2.5.3 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE 

 The Contractor shall submit to the VA representative certification from 
the manufacturer indicating compliance with performance requirements 
for encapsulants when applied according to manufacturer 
recommendations. 

 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 REGULATED AREA PREPARATIONS 

3.1.1 SITE SECURITY 

A. Regulated area access is to be restricted only to authorized, 
trained/accredited and protected personnel. These may include the 
Contractor's employees, employees of Subcontractors, VA employees 
and representatives, State and local inspectors, and any other 
designated individuals. A list of authorized personnel shall be 
established prior to commencing the project and be posted in the 
clean room of the decontamination unit. 

B. Entry into the regulated area by unauthorized individuals shall 
be reported immediately to the Competent Person by anyone 
observing the entry. The Competent Person shall immediately 
require any unauthorized person to leave the regulated area and 
then notify the VA Contracting Officer or VA Representative using 
the most expeditious means. 

C. A log book shall be maintained in the clean room of the 
decontamination unit. Anyone who enters the regulated area must 
record their name, affiliation, time in, and time out for each 
entry. 

D. Access to the regulated area shall be through a single 
decontamination unit. All other access (doors, windows, hallways, 
etc.) shall be sealed or locked to prevent entry to or exit from 
the regulated area. The only exceptions for this requirement are 
the waste/equipment load-out area which shall be sealed except 
during the removal of containerized asbestos waste from the 
regulated area, and emergency exits. Emergency exits shall not be 
locked from the inside; however, they shall be sealed with poly 
sheeting and taped until needed. In any situation where exposure 
to high temperatures which may result in a flame hazard, fire 
retardant poly sheeting must be used. 

E. The Contractor's Competent Person shall control site security 
during abatement operations in order to isolate work in progress 
and protect adjacent personnel. A 24 hour security system shall 
be provided at the entrance to the regulated area to assure that 
all entrants are logged in/out and that only authorized personnel 
are allowed entrance. 

F. The Contractor will have the VA's assistance in notifying 
adjacent personnel of the presence, location and quantity of ACM 
in the regulated area and enforcement of restricted access by the 
VA's employees. 

G. The regulated area shall be locked during non-working hours and 
secured by VA Representative or Competent Person. The VA Police 
should be informed of asbestos abatement regulated areas to 
provide security checks during facility rounds and emergency 
response. 


 

3.1.2. SIGNAGE AND POWER MANAGEMENT 

 

A. Post OSHA DANGER signs meeting the specifications of OSHA 29 CFR 
1926.1101 at any location and approaches to the regulated area 
where airborne concentrations of asbestos may exceed the PEL. 
Signs shall be posted at a distance sufficiently far enough away 
from the regulated area to permit any personnel to read the sign 
and take the necessary measures to avoid exposure. Additional 
signs will be posted following construction of the regulated area 
enclosure. 

B. Shut down and lock out/tag out electric power to the regulated 
area. Provide temporary power and lighting. Insure safe 
installation including GFCI of temporary power sources and 
equipment by compliance with all applicable electrical code and 
OSHA requirements for temporary electrical systems. Electricity 
shall be provided by the VA. 

C. Shut down and lock out/tag out heating, cooling, and air 
conditioning system (HVAC) components that are in, supply or pass 
through the regulated area. Investigate the regulated area and 
agree on pre-abatement condition with the VA's representative. 
Seal all intake and exhaust vents in the regulated area with duct 
tape and 2 layers of 6-mil poly. Also, seal any seams in system 
components that pass through the regulated area. Remove all 
contaminated HVAC system filters and place in labeled 6-mil 
polyethylene disposal bags for staging and eventual disposal as 
asbestos waste. 

 

 

3.1.3 NEGATIVE PRESSURE FILTRATION SYSTEM 

 

 The Contractor shall provide enough HEPA negative air machines to 
effect > - 0.02” WCG pressure. The Competent Person shall determine the 
number of units needed for the regulated area by dividing the cubic 
feet in the regulated area by 15 and then dividing that result by the 
cubic feet per minute (CFM) for each unit to determine the number of 
units needed to effect > - 0.02” WCG pressure. Provide a standby unit 
in the event of machine failure and/or emergency in an adjacent area. 

NIOSH has done extensive studies and has determined that negative air 
machines typically operate at ~50% efficiency. The contractor shall 
consider this in their determination of number of units needed to 
provide > - 0.02” WCG pressure. The contractor shall use double the 
number of machines, based on their calculations, or submit proof their 
machines operate at stated capacities, at a 2" pressure drop across the 
filters. 

 

 

3.1.3.1 DESIGN AND LAYOUT 

A. Before start of work submit the design and layout of the 
regulated area and the negative air machines. The submittal 
shall indicate the number of, location of and size of negative 
air machines. The point(s) of exhaust, air flow within the 
regulated area, anticipated negative pressure differential, 
and supporting calculations for sizing shall be provided. In 
addition, submit the following: 


1. Method of supplying power to the units and 
designation/location of the panels. 

2. Description of testing method(s) for correct air volume 
and pressure differential. 

3. If auxiliary power supply is to be provided for the 
negative air machines, provide a schematic diagram of 
the power supply and manufacturer's data on the 
generator and switch. 

 

3.1.3.2 NEGATIVE AIR MACHINES (HEPA UNITS) 

A. Negative Air Machine Cabinet: The cabinet shall be constructed 
of steel or other durable material capable of withstanding 
potential damage from rough handling and transportation. The 
width of the cabinet shall be less than 30" in order to fit in 
standard doorways. The cabinet must be factory sealed to 
prevent asbestos fibers from being released during use, 
transport, or maintenance. Any access to and replacement of 
filters shall be from the inlet end. The unit must be on 
casters or wheels. 

B. Negative Air Machine Fan: The rating capacity of the fan must 
indicate the CFM under actual operating conditions. 
Manufacturer's typically use "free-air" (no resistance) 
conditions when rating fans. The fan must be a centrifugal 
type fan. 

C. Negative Air Machine Final Filter: The final filter shall be a 
HEPA filter. The filter media must be completely sealed on all 
edges within a structurally rigid frame. The filter shall 
align with a continuous flexible gasket material in the 
negative air machine housing to form an air tight seal. Each 
HEPA filter shall be certified by the manufacturer to have an 
efficiency of not less than 99.97%. Testing shall have been 
done in accordance with Military Standard MIL-STD-282 and Army 
Instruction Manual 136-300-175A. Each filter must bear a UL586 
label to indicate ability to perform under specified 
conditions. Each filter shall be marked with the name of the 
manufacturer, serial number, air flow rating, efficiency and 
resistance, and the direction of test air flow. 

D. Negative Air Machine Pre-filters: The pre-filters, which 
protect the final HEPA filter by removing larger particles, 
are required to prolong the operating life of the HEPA filter. 
Two stages of pre-filtration are required. A first stage prefilter 
shall be a low efficiency type for particles 10 µm or 
larger. A second stage pre-filter shall have a medium 
efficiency effective for particles down to 5 µm or larger. 
Pre-filters shall be installed either on or in the intake 
opening of the NAM and the second stage filter must be held in 
place with a special housing or clamps. 

E. Negative Air Machine Instrumentation: Each unit must be 
equipped with a gauge to measure the pressure drop across the 
filters and to indicate when filters have become loaded and 
need to be changed. A table indicating the cfm for various 
pressure readings on the gauge shall be affixed near the gauge 
for reference or the reading shall indicate at what point the 
filters shall be changed, noting cfm delivery. The unit must 
have an elapsed time meter to show total hours of operation. 


F. Negative Air Machine Safety and Warning Devices: An 
electrical/ mechanical lockout must be provided to prevent the 
fan from being operated without a HEPA filter. Units must be 
equipped with an automatic shutdown device to stop the fan in 
the event of a rupture in the HEPA filter or blockage in the 
discharge of the fan. Warning lights are required to indicate 
normal operation; too high a pressure drop across filters; or 
too low of a pressure drop across filters. 

G. Negative Air Machine Electrical: All electrical components 
shall be approved by the National Electrical Manufacturer's 
Association (NEMA) and Underwriters Laboratories (UL). Each 
unit must be provided with overload protection and the motor, 
fan, fan housing, and cabinet must be grounded. 

H. It is essential that replacement HEPA filters be tested using 
an “in-line” testing method, to ensure the seal around the 
periphery was not damaged during replacement. Damage to the 
outer HEPA filter seal could allow contaminated air to bypass 
the HEPA filter and be discharged to an inappropriate 
location. Contractor will provide written documentation of 
test results for negative air machine units with HEPA filters 
changed by the contractor or documentation when changed and 
tested by the contractor filters 

 

3.1.3.3 PRESSURE DIFFERENTIAL 

The fully operational negative air system within the regulated 
area shall continuously maintain a pressure differential of - 
0.02" water column gauge. Before any disturbance of any asbestos 
material, this shall be demonstrated to the VA by use of a 
pressure differential meter/manometer as required by OSHA 29 CFR 
1926.1101(e)(5)(i). The Competent Person shall be responsible for 
providing, maintaining, and documenting the negative pressure and 
air changes as required by OSHA and this specification. 

 

3.1.3.4 MONITORING 

The pressure differential shall be continuously monitored and 
recorded between the regulated area and the area outside the 
regulated area with a monitoring device that incorporates a strip 
chart recorder. The strip chart recorder shall become part of the 
project log and shall indicate at least -0.02" water column gauge 
for the duration of the project. 

 

3.1.3.5 AUXILIARY GENERATOR 

If the building is occupied during abatement, provide an 
auxiliary gasoline/diesel generator located outside the 
building in an area protected from the weather. In the event 
of a power failure of the general power grid and the VAMC 
emergency power grid, the generator must automatically start 
and supply power to a minimum of 50% of the negative air 
machines in operation. 

 

3.1.3.6 SUPPLEMENTAL MAKE-UP AIR INLETS 

Provide, as needed for proper air flow in the regulated area, 
in a location approved by the VA, openings in the plastic 
sheeting to allow outside air to flow into the regulated area. 
Auxiliary makeup air inlets must be located as far from the 


negative air machines as possible, off the floor near the 
ceiling, and away from the barriers that separate the 
regulated area from the occupied clean areas. Cover the inlets 
with weighted flaps which will seal in the event of failure of 
the negative pressure system. 

 

3.1.3.7 TESTING THE SYSTEM 

The negative pressure system must be tested before any ACM is 
disturbed in any way. After the regulated area has been 
completely prepared, the decontamination units set up, and the 
negative air machines installed, start the units up one at a 
time. Demonstrate and document the operation and testing of 
the negative pressure system to the VA using smoke tubes and a 
negative pressure gauge. Verification and documentation of 
adequate negative pressure differential across each barrier 
must be done at the start of each work shift. 

 

3.1.3.8 DEMONSTRATION OF THE NEGATIVE PRESSURE FILTRATION 
SYSTEM 

The demonstration of the operation of the negative pressure 
system to the VA shall include, but not be limited to, the 
following: 

A. Plastic barriers and sheeting move lightly in toward the 
regulated area. 

B. Curtains of the decontamination units move in toward 
regulated area. 

C. There is a noticeable movement of air through the 
decontamination units. Use the smoke tube to demonstrate 
air movement from the clean room to the shower room to the 
equipment room to the regulated area. 

D. Use smoke tubes to demonstrate air is moving across all 
areas in which work is to be done. Use a differential 
pressure gauge to indicate a negative pressure of at least 
-0.02" across every barrier separating the regulated area 
from the rest of the building. Modify the system as 
necessary to meet the above requirements. 

 

3.1.3.9 USE OF THE NEGATIVE PRESSURE FILTRATION SYSTEM 
DURING ABATEMENT OPERATIONS 

A. Start units before beginning any disturbance of ACM occurs. 
After work begins, the units shall run continuously, 
maintaining 4 actual air changes per hour at a negative 
pressure differential of -0.02" water column gauge, for the 
duration of the work until a final visual clearance and 
final air clearance has been successfully completed. 

 No negative air units shall be shut down at any time unless 
authorized by the VA Contracting Officer, verbally and in 
writing. 

B. Pre-cleaning of ACM contaminated items shall be performed 
after the enclosure has been erected and negative pressure 
has been established in the work area. After items have 
been pre-cleaned and decontaminated, they may be removed 
from the work area for storage until the completion of 
abatement in the work area. 


C. Abatement work shall begin at a location farthest from the 
units and proceed towards them. If an electric failure 
occurs, the Competent Person shall stop all abatement work 
and immediately begin wetting all exposed asbestos 
materials for the duration of the power outage. Abatement 
work shall not resume until power is restored and all units 
are operating properly again. 

D. The negative air machines shall continue to run after all 
work is completed and until a final visual clearance and a 
final air clearance has been successfully completed for 
that regulated area. 

 

3.1.3.10 DISMANTLING THE SYSTEM 

After completion of the final visual and final air clearance 
has been obtained by the VPIH/CIH, the units may be shut down. 
The unit exterior surfaces shall have been completely 
decontaminated; pre-filters are not to be removed and the 
units inlet/outlet sealed with 2 layers of 6 mil poly 
immediately after shut down. No filter removal shall occur at 
the VA site following successful completion of site clearance. 
OSHA/EPA/DOT asbestos shall be attached to the units. 

 

3.1.4 CONTAINMENT BARRIERS AND COVERINGS IN THE REGULATED AREA 

3.1.4.1 GENERAL 

Seal off the perimeter to the regulated area to completely 
isolate the regulated area from adjacent spaces. All surfaces 
in the regulated area must be covered to prevent contamination 
and to facilitate clean-up. Should adjacent areas become 
contaminated as a result of the work, shall immediately stop 
work and clean up the contamination at no additional cost to 
the VA. Provide firestopping and identify all fire barrier 
penetrations due to abatement work as specified in Section 
3.1.4.8; FIRESTOPPING. 

 

3.1.4.2 PREPARATION PRIOR TO SEALING THE REGULATED AREA 

Place all tools, scaffolding, materials and equipment needed 
for working in the regulated area prior to erecting any 
plastic sheeting. All uncontaminated removable furniture, 
equipment and/or supplies shall be removed by the VA from the 
regulated area before commencing work. Any objects remaining 
in the regulated area shall be completely covered with 2 
layers of 6-mil fire retardant poly sheeting and secured with 
duct tape. Lock out and tag out any HVAC/electrical systems in 
the regulated area. 

 

3.1.4.3 CONTROLLING ACCESS TO THE REGULATED AREA 

Access to the regulated area is allowed only through the 
personnel decontamination facility (PDF). All other means of 
access shall be eliminated and OSHA DANGER demarcation signs 
posted as required by OSHA. If the regulated area is adjacent 
to, or within view of an occupied area, provide a visual 
barrier of 6 mil opaque fire retardant poly to prevent 
building occupant observation. If the adjacent area is 


accessible to the public, the barrier must be solid and 
capable of withstanding the negative pressure. 

 

3.1.4.4 CRITICAL BARRIERS 

 Completely separate any operations in the regulated area 
from adjacent areas using 2 layers of 6 mil fire retardant 
poly and duct tape. Individually seal with 2 layers of 6 mil 
poly and duct tape all HVAC openings into the regulated area. 
Individually seal all lighting fixtures, clocks, doors, 
windows, convectors, speakers, or any other objects/openings 
in the regulated area. Heat must be shut off any objects 
covered with poly. 

 

3.1.4.5 PRIMARY BARRIERS 

A. Cover the regulated area with two layers of 6 mil fire 
retardant poly on the floors and two layers of 4 mil, fire 
retardant poly on the walls, unless otherwise directed in 
writing by the VA representative. Floor layers must form a 
right angle with the wall and turn up the wall at least 300 
mm (12"). Seams must overlap at least 1800 mm (6') and must 
be spray glued and taped. Install sheeting so that layers 
can be removed independently from each other. Carpeting 
shall be covered with three layers of 6 mil poly. 
Corrugated cardboard sheets must be placed between the 
bottom and middle layers of poly. Mechanically support and 
seal with duct tape and glue all wall layers. 

 

B. If stairs and ramps are covered with 6 mil plastic, two 
layers must be used. Provide 19 mm (3/4") exterior grade 
plywood treads held in place with duct tape/glue on the 
plastic. Do not cover rungs or rails with any isolation 
materials. 

 

3.1.4.6 SECONDARY BARRIERS 

A loose layer of 6 mil shall be used as a drop cloth to 
protect the primary layers from debris generated during the 
abatement. This layer shall be replaced as needed during the 
work and at a minimum once per work day. 

 

3.1.4.7 EXTENSION OF THE REGULATED AREA 

If the enclosure of the regulated area is breached in any way 
that could allow contamination to occur, the affected area 
shall be included in the regulated area and constructed as per 
this section. Decontamination measures must be started 
immediately and continue until air monitoring indicates 
background levels are met. 

3.1.4.8 FIRESTOPPING 

A. Through penetrations caused by cables, cable trays, pipes, 
sleeves, conduits, etc. must be firestopped with a firerated 
firestop system providing an air tight seal. 

B. Firestop materials that are not equal to the wall or 
ceiling penetrated shall be brought to the attention of the 


VA Representative. The contractor shall list all areas of 
penetration, the type of sealant used, and whether or not 
the location is fire rated. Any discovery of penetrations 
during abatement shall be brought to the attention of the 
VA representative immediately. All walls, floors and 
ceilings are considered fire rated unless otherwise 
determined by the VA Representative or Fire Marshall. 

C. Any visible openings whether or not caused by a penetration 
shall be reported by the Contractor to the VA 
Representative for a sealant system determination. 
Firestops shall meet ASTM E814 and UL 1479 requirements for 
the opening size, penetrant, and fire rating needed. 

 

3.1.5 SANITARY FACILITIES 

The Contractor shall provide sanitary facilities for abatement 
personnel and maintain them in a clean and sanitary condition 
throughout the abatement project. 

 

3.1.6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 

Provide whole body clothing, head coverings, gloves and foot coverings 
and any other personal protective equipment as determined by conducting 
the hazard assessment required by OSHA at 29 CFR 1910.132 (d). The 
Competent Person shall ensure the integrity of personal protective 
equipment worn for the duration of the project. Duct tape shall be used 
to secure all suit sleeves to wrists and to secure foot coverings at 
the ankle. 

 

3.1.7 PRE-CLEANING 

 

The VA will provide water for abatement purposes. The Contractor shall 
connect to the existing VA system. The service to the shower(s) shall 
be supplied with backflow prevention. 

 

Pre-cleaning of ACM contaminated items shall be performed after the 
enclosure has been erected and negative pressure has been established 
in the work area. All workers performing pre-cleaning activities must 
don appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE), as specified 
throughout this document and as approved in the Contractor’s work plan. 
After items have been pre-cleaned and decontaminated, they may be 
removed from the work area for storage until the completion of 
abatement in the work area. 

 

Pre-clean all movable objects within the regulated area using a HEPA 
filtered vacuum and/or wet cleaning methods as appropriate. After 
cleaning, these objects shall be removed from the regulated area and 
carefully stored in an uncontaminated location. Drapes, clothing, 
upholstered furniture and other fabric items should be disposed of as 
asbestos contaminated waste. Cleaning these asbestos contaminated items 
utilizing HEPA vacuum techniques and off-premises steam cleaning is 
very difficult and cannot guarantee decontamination. Carpeting will be 
disposed of prior to abatement if in the regulated area. If ACM floor 
tile is attached to the carpet while the Contractor is removing the 
carpet that section of the carpet will be disposed of as asbestos 
waste. The pre-cleaning shall be completed by the Contractor. 

 


Pre-clean all fixed objects in the regulated area using HEPA filtered 
vacuums and/or wet cleaning techniques as appropriate. Careful 
attention must be paid to machinery behind grills or gratings where 
access may be difficult but contamination may be significant. Also, pay 
particular attention to wall, floor and ceiling penetration behind 
fixed items. After pre-cleaning, enclose fixed objects with 2 layers of 
6-mil poly and seal securely in place with duct tape. Objects (e.g., 
permanent fixtures, shelves, electronic equipment, laboratory tables, 
sprinklers, alarm systems, closed circuit TV equipment and computer 
cables) which must remain in the regulated area and that require 
special ventilation or enclosure requirements should be designated here 
along with specified means of protection. Contact the manufacturer for 
special protection requirements. 

Control panels, gauges etc., in the regulated area may require VA 
access during abatement. These shall be designated by the VA 
representative and enclosures constructed by the Contractor, with 
access flaps sealed with waterproof tape. 

 

Pre-clean all surfaces in the regulated area using HEPA filtered 
vacuums and/or wet cleaning methods as appropriate. Do not use any 
methods that would raise dust such as dry sweeping or vacuuming with 
equipment not equipped with HEPA filters. Do not disturb asbestoscontaining 
materials during this pre-cleaning phase. Pre-cleaning shall 
be completed by the Contractor. 

 

3.1.8 PRE-ABATEMENT ACTIVITIES 

3.1.8.1 PRE-ABATEMENT MEETING 

The VA representative, upon receipt, review, and substantial 
approval of all pre-abatement submittals and verification by the 
CPIH/CIH that all materials and equipment required for the 
project are on the site, will arrange for a pre-abatement meeting 
between the Contractor, the CPIH/CIH, Competent Person(s), the VA 
representative(s), and the VPIH/CIH. The purpose of the meeting 
is to discuss any aspect of the submittals needing clarification 
or amplification and to discuss any aspect of the project 
execution and the sequence of the operation. The Contractor shall 
be prepared to provide any supplemental information/documentation 
to the VA's representative regarding any submittals, 
documentation, materials or equipment. Upon satisfactory 
resolution of any outstanding issues, the VA's representative 
will issue a written order to proceed to the Contractor. No 
abatement work of any kind described in the following provisions 
shall be initiated prior to the VA written order to proceed. 

 

3.1.8.2 PRE-ABATEMENT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS 

A. Perform all preparatory work for the first regulated area 
in accordance with the approved work schedule and with this 
specification. 

B. Upon completion of all preparatory work, the CPIH/CIH will 
inspect the work and systems and will notify the VA's 
representative when the work is completed in accordance 
with this specification. The VA's representative may 
inspect the regulated area and the systems with the 
VPIH/CIH and may require that upon satisfactory inspection, 
the Contractor's employees perform all major aspects of the 


approved AHAP(s), especially worker protection, respiratory 
systems, contingency plans, decontamination procedures, and 
monitoring to demonstrate satisfactory operation. The 
operational systems for respiratory protection and the 
negative pressure system shall be demonstrated for proper 
performance. 

C. The CPIH/CIH shall document the pre-abatement activities 
described above and deliver a copy to the VA's 
representative. 

D. Upon satisfactory inspection of the installation of and 
operation of systems the VA's representative will notify 
the Contractor in writing to proceed with the asbestos 
abatement work in accordance with this specification and 
all applicable regulations. 

 

3.1.8.3 PRE-ABATEMENT INSPECTIONS AND PREPARATIONS 

Before any work begins on the construction of the regulated area, 
the Contractor will: 

A. Conduct a space-by-space inspection with an authorized VA 
representative and prepare a written inventory of all 
existing damage in those spaces where asbestos abatement 
will occur. Still or video photography may be used to 
supplement the written damage inventory. Document will be 
signed and certified as accurate by both parties. 

B. The VA Representative, the Contractor, and the VPIH/CIH 
must be aware of VA A/E Quality Alert 07/09 indicating the 
failure to identify asbestos in the areas listed as well as 
common issues when preparing specifications and contract 
documents. This is especially critical when demolition is 
planned, because AHERA surveys are non-destructive, and ACM 
may remain undetected. A NESHAPS (destructive) ACM 
inspection should be conducted on all building structures 
that will be demolished. Ensure the following areas are 
inspected on the project: lay-in ceilings concealing ACM; 
ACM behind walls/windows from previous renovations; inside 
utility chases/walls; transite piping/ductwork/sheets; 
behind radiators; lab fume hoods; transite lab countertops; 
roofing materials; below window sills; water/sewer lines; 
electrical conduit coverings; crawlspaces (previous 
abatement contamination); flooring/mastic covered by 
carpeting/new flooring; exterior insulated wall panels; on 
underground fuel tanks; and steam line trench coverings. 

C. Ensure that all furniture, machinery, equipment, curtains, 
drapes, blinds, and other movable objects required to be 
removed from the regulated area have been cleaned and 
removed or properly protected from contamination. The VA 
shall be responsible for moving all items listed in the 
section. 

D. If present and required, remove and dispose of carpeting 
from floors in the regulated area. 

E. Inspect existing firestopping in the regulated area. 
Correct as needed. 


 

3.2 REMOVAL OF ACM 

3.2.1 WETTING ACM 

A. Use amended water for the wetting of ACM prior to removal. The 
Competent Person shall assure the wetting of ACM meets the definition 
of "adequately wet" in the EPA NESHAP regulation and OSHA’s “wet 
methods” for the duration of the project. A removal encapsulant may be 
used instead of amended water with written approval of the VA's 
representative. 

B. Amended Water: Provide water to which a surfactant has been added shall 
be used to wet the ACM and reduce the potential for fiber release 
during disturbance of ACM. The mixture must be equal to or greater than 
the wetting provided by water amended by a surfactant consisting one 
ounce of 50% polyoxyethylene ester and 50% polyoxyethylene ether mixed 
with 5 gallons (19L) of water. 

C. Removal Encapsulant: When authorized by VA, provide a penetrating 
encapsulant designed specifically for the removal of ACM. The material 
must, when used, result in adequate wetting of the ACM and retard fiber 
release during removal. 

 

3.2.2 SECONDARY BARRIER AND WALKWAYS 

A. Install as a drop cloth a 6 mil poly sheet at the beginning of each 
work shift where removal is to be done during that shift. Completely 
cover floors and any walls within 10 feet (3 meters) of the area where 
work is to done. Secure the secondary barrier with duct tape to prevent 
it from moving or debris from getting behind it. Remove the secondary 
barrier at the end of the shift or as work in the area is completed. 
Keep residue on the secondary barrier wetted. When removing, fold 
inward to prevent spillage and place in a disposal bag. 

B. Install walkways using 6 mil black poly between the regulated area and 
the decontamination facilities (PDF and W/EDF) to protect the primary 
layers from contamination and damage. Install the walkways at the 
beginning of each shift and remove at the end of each shift. 

 

3.2.3 WET REMOVAL OF ACM 

A. Adequately and thoroughly wet the ACM to be removed prior to removal 
with amended water or when authorized by VA, removal encapsulant to 
reduce/prevent fiber release to the air. Adequate time (at a minimum 
two hours) must be allowed for the amended water or removal encapsulant 
to saturate the ACM. Abatement personnel must not disturb dry ACM. Use 
a fine spray of amended water or removal encapsulant. Saturate the 
material sufficiently to wet to the substrate without causing excessive 
dripping. The material must be sprayed repeatedly/continuously during 
the removal process in order to maintain adequately wet conditions. 
Removal encapsulants must be applied in accordance with the 
manufacturer's written instructions. Perforate or carefully separate, 
using wet methods, an outer covering that is painted or jacketed in 
order to allow penetration and wetting of the material. Where 
necessary, carefully remove covering while wetting to minimize fiber 
release. In no event shall dry removal occur except when authorized in 
writing by the VPIH/CIH and VA when a greater safety hazard (e.g., 
electricity) is present. 

 


B. If ACM does not wet well with amended water due to composition, coating 
or jacketing, remove as follows: 

1. Mist work area continuously with amended water whenever necessary to 
reduce airborne fiber levels. 

2. Remove saturated ACM in small sections. Do not allow material to dry 
out. As material is removed, bag material, while still wet into 
disposal bags. Twist the bag neck tightly, bend over (gooseneck) and 
seal with a minimum of three tight wraps of duct tape. Clean 
/decontaminate the outside of the bag of any residue and move to 
washdown station adjacent to W/EDF. 

3. Fireproofing or Architectural Finish on Scratch Coat: Spray with a 
fine mist of amended water or removal encapsulant. Allow time for 
saturation to the substrate. Do not over saturate causing excess 
dripping. Scrape material from substrate. Remove material in 
manageable quantities and control falling to staging or floor. If 
the falling distance is over 20 feet (6M), use a drop chute to 
contain material through descent. Remove residue remaining on the 
scratch coat after scraping is done using a stiff bristle hand 
brush. If a removal encapsulant is used, remove residue completely 
before the encapsulant dries. Periodically re-wet the substrate with 
amended water as needed to prevent drying of the material before the 
residue is removed from the substrate. 

4. Fireproofing or Architectural Finish on Wire Lath: Spray with a fine 
mist of amended water or removal encapsulant. Allow time to 
completely saturate the material. Do not over saturate causing 
excess dripping. If the surface has been painted or otherwise 
coated, cut small holes as needed and apply amended water or removal 
encapsulant from above. Cut saturated wire lath into 2' x 6' (50mm x 
150mm) sections and cut hanger wires. Roll up complete with ACM, 
cover in burlap and hand place in disposal bag. Do not drop to 
floor. After removal of lath/ACM, remove any overspray on decking 
and structure using stiff bristle nylon brushes. Depending on 
hardness of overspray, scrapers may be needed for removal. 

5. Pipe/Tank/Vessel/Boiler Insulation: Remove the outer layer of wrap 
while spraying with amended water in order to saturate the ACM. 
Spray ACM with a fine mist of amended water or removal encapsulant. 
Allow time to saturate the material to the substrate. Cut bands 
holding pre-formed pipe insulation sections. Slit jacketing at the 
seams, remove and hand place in a disposal bag. Do not allow 
dropping to the floor. Remove molded fitting insulation/mud in large 
pieces and hand place in a disposal bag. Remove any residue on pipe 
or fitting with a stiff bristle nylon brush. In locations where pipe 
fitting insulation is removed from fibrous glass or other nonasbestos 
insulated straight runs of pipe, remove fibrous material at 
least 6" from the point it contacts the ACM. 

 

 

3.2.4 WET REMOVAL OF AMOSITE 

A. Should areas of amosite ACM be located during the course of demolition 
/renovation, these areas will require local exhaust ventilation and 
collection as described below, in addition to wet removal. Provide 
specific description /locations/ drawings. 

B. Provide local exhaust ventilation and collection systems to assure 
collection of amosite fibers at the point of generation. A 300 mm (12") 
flexible rigid non-collapsing duct shall be shall be located no more 
than 600 mm (2') from any scraping/brushing activity. Primary filters 


must be replaced every 30 minutes on the negative air machines. Each 
scraping/brushing activity must have a negative air machine devoted to 
it. For pre-molded pipe insulation or cutting wire lathe attach a 1200 
mm (4') square flared end piece on the intake of the duct. Support the 
duct horizontally at a point 600 mm (2') below the work to effect 
capture. One person in the crew shall be assigned to operate the duct 
collection system on a continual basis. 

C. Amosite does not wet well with amended water. Submit full 
information/documentation on the wetting agent proposed prior to start 
for review and approval by the VPIH/CIH and VA Contracting Officer. 
Insure that the material is worked on in small sections and is 
thoroughly and continuously wetted. Package as soon as possible while 
wet. Remove as required. 

 

3.3 LOCKDOWN ENCAPSULATION 

3.3.1 GENERAL 

 Lockdown encapsulation is an integral part of the ACM removal. At the 
conclusion of ACM removal and before removal of the primary barriers, 
the contractor shall encapsulate all surfaces with a bridging 
encapsulant. 

 

3.3.2 DELIVERY AND STORAGE 

 Deliver materials to the job site in original, new and unopened 
containers bearing the manufacturer's name and label as well as the 
following information: name of material, manufacturer's stock number, 
date of manufacture, thinning instructions, application instructions 
and the MSDS for the material. 

 

3.3.3 WORKER PROTECTION 

 Before beginning work with any material for which an MSDS has been 
submitted, provide workers with any required personal protective 
equipment. The required personal protective equipment shall be used 
whenever exposure to the material might occur. In addition to 
OSHA/specification requirements for respiratory protection, a paint 
pre-filter and an organic vapor cartridge, at a minimum, shall used in 
addition to the HEPA filter when an organic solvent based encapsulant 
is used. The CPIH/CIH shall be responsible for provision of adequate 
respiratory protection. Note: Flammable and combustible encapsulants 
shall not be used, unless authorized in writing by the VA. 

 

 

3.3.4 ENCAPSULATION OF SCRATCH COAT PLASTER OR PIPING 

A. Apply two coats of lockdown encapsulant to the scratch coat plaster or 
piping after all ACM has been removed. Apply in strict accordance with 
the manufacturer's instructions. Any deviation from the instructions 
must be approved by the VA's representative in writing prior to 
commencing the work. 

B. Apply the lockdown encapsulant with an airless sprayer at a pressure 
and using a nozzle orifice as recommended by the manufacturer. Apply 
the first coat while the while the scratch coat is still damp from the 
asbestos removal process, after passing the visual inspection. If the 
surface has been allowed to dry, wet wipe or HEPA vacuum prior to 
spraying with encapsulant. Apply a second coat over the first coat in 
strict conformance with the manufacturer's instructions. Color the 


lockdown encapsulant and contrast the color in the second coat so that 
visual confirmation of completeness and uniform coverage of each coat 
is possible. Adhere to the manufacturer's instructions for coloring. At 
the completion of the encapsulation, the surface must be a uniform 
third color produced by the mixture. 

 

3.3.5 SEALING EXPOSED EDGES 

 Seal edges of ACM exposed by removal work which is inaccessible, such 
as a sleeve, wall penetration, etc., with two coats of bridging 
encapsulant. Prior to sealing, permit the exposed edges to dry 
completely to permit penetration of the bridging encapsulant. Apply in 
accordance with 3.3.4 (B). 

 

3.4 DISPOSAL OF ACM WASTE MATERIALS 

3.4.1 GENERAL 

 Dispose of waste ACM and debris which is packaged in accordance with 
these specifications, OSHA, EPA and DOT. The landfill requirements for 
packaging must also be met. Transport will be in compliance with 49 CFR 
100–185 regulations. Disposal shall be done at an approved landfill. 
Disposal of non-friable ACM shall be done in accordance with applicable 
regulations. 

 

3.4.2 PROCEDURES 

A. The VA must be notified at least 24 hours in advance of any waste 
removed from the containment. 

B. Asbestos waste shall be packaged and moved through the W/EDF into a 
covered transport container in accordance with procedures is this 
specification. Waste shall be double-bagged and wetted with amended 
water prior to disposal. Wetted waste can be very heavy. Bags shall 
not be overfilled. Bags shall be securely sealed to prevent accidental 
opening and/or leakage. The top shall be tightly twisted and goose 
necked prior to tightly sealing with at least three wraps of duct tape. 
Ensure that unauthorized persons do not have access to the waste 
material once it is outside the regulated area. All transport 
containers must be covered at all times when not in use. NESHAP signs 
must be on containers during loading and unloading. Material shall not 
be transported in open vehicles. If drums are used for packaging, the 
drums shall be labeled properly and shall not be re-used. 

C. Waste Load Out: Waste load out shall be done in accordance with the 
procedures in W/EDF Decontamination Procedures. Sealed waste bags shall 
be decontaminated on exterior surfaces by wet cleaning and/or HEPA 
vacuuming before being placed in the second waste bag and sealed, which 
then must also be wet wiped or HEPA vacuumed. 
D. Asbestos waste with sharp edged components, i.e., nails, screws, lath, 
strapping, tin sheeting, jacketing, metal mesh, etc., which might tear 
poly bags shall be wrapped securely in burlap before packaging and, if 
needed, use a poly lined fiber drum as the second container, prior to 
disposal. 


 

3.5 PROJECT DECONTAMINATION 

3.5.1 GENERAL 

A. The entire work related to project decontamination shall be performed 
under the close supervision and monitoring of the CPIH/CIH. 


B. If the asbestos abatement work is in an area which was contaminated 
prior to the start of abatement, the decontamination will be done by 
cleaning the primary barrier poly prior to its removal and cleanings of 
the surfaces of the regulated area after the primary barrier removal. 

C. If the asbestos abatement work is in an area which was uncontaminated 
prior to the start of abatement, the decontamination will be done by 
cleaning the primary barrier poly prior to its removal, thus preventing 
contamination of the building when the regulated area critical barriers 
are removed. 

 

3.5.2 REGULATED AREA CLEARANCE 

 Clearance air testing and other requirements which must be met before 
release of the Contractor and re-occupancy of the regulated area space 
are specified in Final Testing Procedures. 

 

3.5.3 WORK DESCRIPTION 

 Decontamination includes the clearance air testing in the regulated 
area and the decontamination and removal of the enclosures/facilities 
installed prior to the abatement work including primary/critical 
barriers, PDF and W/EDF facilities, and negative pressure systems. 

 

3.5.4 PRE-DECONTAMINATION CONDITIONS 

A. Before decontamination starts, all ACM waste from the regulated area 
shall be collected and removed, and the loose 6 mil layer of poly 
removed while being adequately wetted with amended water and disposed 
of along with any gross debris generated by the work. 

B. At the start of decontamination, the following shall be in place: 

1. Primary barriers consisting of 2 layers of 6 mil poly on the floor 
and 4 mil poly on the walls. 

2. Critical barriers consisting of 2 layers of 6 mil poly which is the 
sole barrier between the regulated area and openings to the rest of 
the building or outside. 

4. Decontamination facilities for personnel and equipment in operating 
condition and the negative pressure system in operation. 

 

3.5.5 FIRST CLEANING 

 Carry out a first cleaning of all surfaces of the regulated area 
including items of remaining poly sheeting, tools, scaffolding, 
ladders/staging by wet methods and/or HEPA vacuuming. Do not use dry 
dusting/sweeping/air blowing methods. Use each surface of a wetted 
cleaning cloth one time only and then dispose of as contaminated waste. 
Continue this cleaning until there is no visible residue from abated 
surfaces or poly or other surfaces. Remove all filters in the air 
handling system and dispose of as ACM waste in accordance with these 
specifications. The negative pressure system shall remain in operation 
during this time. Additional cleaning(s) may be needed as determined by 
the CPIH/VPIH/CIH. 

 

3.5.6 PRE-CLEARANCE INSPECTION AND TESTING 

 The CPIH/CIH and VPIH/CIH will perform a thorough and detailed visual 
inspection at the end of the cleaning to determine whether there is any 
visible residue in the regulated area. If the visual inspection is 
acceptable, the CPIH/CIH will perform pre-clearance sampling using 
aggressive clearance as detailed in 40 CFR 763 Subpart E (AHERA) 


Appendix A (III)(B)(7)(d). If the sampling results show values below 
0.01 f/cc, then the Contractor shall notify the VA's representative of 
the results with a brief report from the CPIH/CIH documenting the 
inspection and sampling results and a statement verifying that the 
regulated area is ready for lockdown encapsulation. The VA reserves the 
right to utilize their own VPIH/CIH to perform a pre-clearance 
inspection and testing for verification. 

 

3.5.7 LOCKDOWN ENCAPSULATION OF ABATED SURFACES 

 With the express written permission of the VA's representative, perform 
lockdown encapsulation of all surfaces from which asbestos was abated 
in accordance with the procedures in this specification. Negative 
pressure shall be maintained in the regulated area during the lockdown 
application. 

 

3.6 FINAL VISUAL INSPECTION AND AIR CLEARANCE TESTING 

3.6.1 GENERAL 

 Notify the VA representative 24 hours in advance for the performance of 
the final visual inspection and testing. The final visual inspection 
and testing will be performed by the VPIH/CIH starting after the final 
cleaning. 

 

3.6.2 FINAL VISUAL INSPECTION 

 Final visual inspection will include the entire regulated area, the 
PDF, all poly sheeting, seals over HVAC openings, doorways, windows, 
and any other openings. If any debris, residue, dust or any other 
suspect material is detected, the final cleaning shall be repeated at 
no cost to the VA. Dust/material samples may be collected and analyzed 
at no cost to the VA at the discretion of the VPIH/CIH to confirm 
visual findings. When the regulated area is visually clean the final 
testing can be done. 

 

3.6.3 FINAL AIR CLEARANCE TESTING 

A. After an acceptable final visual inspection by the VPIH/CIH and VA 
Representative, the VPIH/CIH will perform the final clearance testing. 
Air samples will be collected and analyzed in accordance with 
procedures for AHERA in this specification. If work is less than 260 
lf/160 sf/35 cf, 5 PCM samples shall be collected for clearance and a 
minimum of one field blank. If work is equal to or more than 260 lf/160 
sf/35 cf, AHERA TEM sampling shall be performed for clearance. TEM 
analysis shall be done in accordance with procedures for EPA AHERA in 
this specification. If the release criteria are not met, the Contractor 
shall repeat the final cleaning and continue decontamination procedures 
until clearance is achieved. All Additional inspection and testing 
costs will be borne by the Contractor. 

B. If release criteria are met, proceed to perform the abatement closeout 
and to issue the certificate of completion in accordance with these 
specifications. 

 

3.6.4 FINAL AIR CLEARANCE PROCEDURES 

A. Contractor's Release Criteria: Work in a regulated area is complete 
when the regulated area is visually clean and airborne fiber levels 
have been reduced to or below 0.01 f/cc as measured by the AHERA PCM 



protocol, or 70 AHERA structures per square millimeter (s/mm2) by AHERA 
TEM. 


B. Air Monitoring and Final Clearance Sampling: To determine if the 
elevated airborne fiber counts encountered during abatement operations 
have been reduced to the specified level, the VPIH/CIH will secure 
samples and analyze them according to the following procedures: 

1. Fibers Counted: “Fibers” referred to in this section shall be either 
all fibers regardless of composition as counted in the NIOSH 7400 
PCM method or asbestos fibers counted using the AHERA TEM method. 
2. Aggressive Sampling: All final air testing samples shall be 
collected using aggressive sampling techniques except where soil is 
not encapsulated or enclosed. Samples will be collected on 0.8. MCE 
filters for PCM analysis and 0.45. Polycarbonate filters for TEM. A 
minimum of 1200 Liters of using calibrated pumps shall be collected 
for clearance samples. Before pumps are started, initiate aggressive 
air mixing sampling as detailed in 40 CFR 763 Subpart E (AHERA) 
Appendix A (III)(B)(7)(d). Air samples will be collected in areas 
subject to normal air circulation away from corners, obstructed 
locations, and locations near windows, doors, or vents. After air 
sampling pumps have been shut off, circulating fans shall be shut 
off. The negative pressure system shall continue to operate. 
3. Final clearance for soil that is not encapsulated, samples will be 
collected on 0.8µ MCE filters for PCM analysis and 0.45µ 
Polycarbonate filters for TEM. A minimum of 1200 Liters of using 
calibrated pumps shall be collected for clearance samples. Air 
clearance of work areas where contaminated soil has been removed is 
in addition to the requirement for clearance by bulk sample analysis 
discussed within these specifications. There will be no aggressive 
air sampling for the clearance of soil due to the fact that 
aggressive air sampling may overload the cassettes. 
4. Random samples shall be collected from areas of soil which have been 
abated to ensure that the soil has been properly decontaminated. 
The total number of samples to be collected from the soil areas 
shall be; <1000 SF of soil – 3 samples; >1000 to <5000 SF of soil – 
5 samples; and >5000 SF of soil – 7 samples. The soil samples shall 
be collected in a statistically random manner and shall be analyzed 
by PLM method. The clearance level to determine the soil clean is 
<1% asbestos by weight as analyzed by PLM method. If this level is 
achieved, the soil areas shall be considered clear. If the levels 
are >1% asbestos, the areas shall be re-cleaned until the sample 
results are <1%. 


 

3.6.5 CLEARANCE SAMPLING USING PCM – LESS THAN 260LF/160SF: 

A. The VPIH/CIH will perform clearance samples as indicated by the 
specification. 

B. The NIOSH 7400 PCM method will be used for clearance sampling with a 
minimum collection volume of 1200 Liters of air. A minimum of 5 PCM 
clearance samples shall be collected. All samples must be equal to or 
less than 0.01 f/cc to clear the regulated area. 

C. Random samples shall be collected from areas of soil which have been 
abated to ensure that the soil has been properly decontaminated. The 
total number of samples to be collected from the soil areas shall be; 
<1000 SF of soil – 3 samples; >1000 to <5000 SF of soil – 5 samples; 
and >5000 SF of soil – 7 samples. The soil samples shall be collected 
in a statistically random manner and shall be analyzed by PLM method. 
The clearance level to determine the soil clean is <1% asbestos by 


weight as analyzed by PLM method. If this level is achieved, the soil 
areas shall be considered clear. If the levels are >1% asbestos, the 
areas shall be re-cleaned until the sample results are <1%. 

 

3.6.6 CLEARANCE SAMPLING USING TEM – EQUAL TO OR MORE THAN 260LF/160SF: TEM 

 A. Clearance requires 13 samples be collected; 5 inside the regulated 
area; 5 outside the regulated area; and 3 field blanks. 

 B. The PCM method will be used for clearance sampling with a minimum 
collection volume of 1200 Liters of air. A minimum of 13 clearance 
samples shall be collected. 

 

3.6.7 LABORATORY TESTING OF PCM CLEARANCE SAMPLES 
The services of an AIHA accredited laboratory will be employed by the 
VA to perform analysis for the PCM air samples. The accredited 
laboratory shall be successfully participating in the AIHA Proficiency 
Analytical Testing (PAT) program. Samples will be sent daily by the 
VPIH/CIH so that verbal/faxed reports can be received within 24 hours. 
A complete record, certified by the laboratory, of all air monitoring 
tests and results will be furnished to the VA’s representative and the 
Contractor. 

 

3.6.8 LABORATORY TESTING OF TEM SAMPLES 

 Samples shall be sent by the VPIH/CIH to a NIST accredited laboratory 
for analysis by TEM. The laboratory shall be successfully participating 
in the NIST Airborne Asbestos Analysis (TEM) program. Verbal/faxed 
results from the laboratory shall be available within 24 hours after 
receipt of the samples. A complete record, certified by the laboratory, 
of all TEM results shall be furnished to the VA's representative and 
the Contractor. 

 

 

 

 

3.6.9 LABORATORY TESTING OF BULK SAMPLES 

 

 Samples shall be sent by the VPIH/CIH or CPIH/CIH to a NIST accredited 
laboratory for analysis by PLM. The laboratory shall be successfully 
participating in the NIST Bulk Asbestos Analysis (PLM) program. 
Verbal/faxed results from the laboratory shall be available within 24 
hours after receipt of the samples. A complete record, certified by the 
laboratory, of all PCM results shall be furnished to the VA's 
representative and the Contractor. 

 

3.7 ABATEMENT CLOSEOUT AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE 

3.7.1 COMPLETION OF ABATEMENT WORK 

 After thorough decontamination, seal negative air machines with 2 
layers of 6 mil poly and duct tape to form a tight seal at the 
intake/outlet ends before removal from the regulated area. Complete 
asbestos abatement work upon meeting the regulated area visual and air 
clearance criteria and fulfilling the following: 

A. Remove all equipment and materials from the project area. 

B. Dispose of all packaged ACM waste as required. 

C. Repair or replace all interior finishes damaged during the abatement 
work, as required. 


D. Fulfill other project closeout requirements as required in this 
specification. 

 

3.7.2 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION BY CONTRACTOR 

 The CPIH/CIH shall complete and sign the "Certificate of Completion" in 
accordance with Attachment 1 at the completion of the abatement and 
decontamination of the regulated area. 

 

3.7.3 WORK SHIFTS 

 All work shall be done during administrative hours (8:00 AM to 4:30 PM) 
Monday -Friday excluding Federal Holidays. Any change in the work 
schedule must be approved in writing by the VA Representative. 

 

3.7.4 RE-INSULATION 

 If required as part of the contract, replace all asbestos containing 
insulation/fire-proofing with suitable non-asbestos material. Provide 
MSDS’s for all replacement materials in advance of installation for VA 
approval. Refer to Section 23 07 11, HVAC, PLUMBING, AND BOILER PLANT 
INSULATION. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ATTACHMENT #1 

CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION 

DATE: VA Project #: 


PROJECT NAME: Abatement Contractor: 

VAMC/ADDRESS: 

1. I certify that I have personally inspected, monitored and supervised the 
abatement work of (specify regulated area or Building): 

 which took place from / / to / / 

2. That throughout the work all applicable requirements/regulations and the 
VA's specifications were met. 

3. That any person who entered the regulated area was protected with the 
appropriate personal protective equipment and respirator and that they 
followed the proper entry and exit procedures and the proper operating 
procedures for the duration of the work. 


4. That all employees of the Abatement Contractor engaged in this work were 
trained in respiratory protection, were experienced with abatement work, 
had proper medical surveillance documentation, were fit-tested for their 
respirator, and were not exposed at any time during the work to asbestos 
without the benefit of appropriate respiratory protection. 

5. That I performed and supervised all inspection and testing specified and 
required by applicable regulations and VA specifications. 

6. That the conditions inside the regulated area were always maintained in a 
safe and healthy condition and the maximum fiber count never exceeded 0.5 
f/cc, except as described below. 

7. That all abatement work was done in accordance with OSHA requirements and 
the manufacturer’s recommendations. 

 

CPIH/CIH Signature/Date:................................................... 

 

CPIH/CIH Print Name:....................................................... 

 

Abatement Contractor Signature/Date:....................................... 

 

Abatement Contractor Print Name:........................................... 

 

 

 

 

 

ATTACHMENT #2 

CERTIFICATE OF WORKER'S ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

PROJECT NAME: DATE: 

PROJECT ADDRESS: 

ABATEMENT CONTRACTOR'S NAME: 

WORKING WITH ASBESTOS CAN BE HAZARDOUS TO YOUR HEALTH. INHALING ASBESTOS HAS 
BEEN LINKED WITH VARIOUS TYPES OF CANCERS. IF YOU SMOKE AND INHALE ASBESTOS 
FIBERS, YOUR CHANCES OF DEVELOPING LUNG CANCER IS GREATER THAN THAT OF THE NONSMOKING 
PUBLIC. 

Your employer's contract with the owner for the above project requires that: 
You must be supplied with the proper personal protective equipment including an 
adequate respirator and be trained in its use. You must be trained in safe and 
healthy work practices and in the use of the equipment found at an asbestos 
abatement project. You must receive/have a current medical examination for 
working with asbestos. These things shall be provided at no cost to you. By 
signing this certificate you are indicating to the owner that your employer has 
met these obligations. 

RESPIRATORY PROTECTION: I have been trained in the proper use of respirators 
and have been informed of the type of respirator to be used on the above 


indicated project. I have a copy of the written Respiratory Protection Program 
issued by my employer. I have been provided for my exclusive use, at no cost, 
with a respirator to be used on the above indicated project. 

TRAINING COURSE: I have been trained by a third party, State/EPA accredited 
trainer in the requirements for an AHERA/OSHA Asbestos Abatement Worker 
training course, 32 hours minimum duration. I currently have a valid State 
accreditation certificate. The topics covered in the course include, as a 
minimum, the following: 

 Physical Characteristics and Background Information on Asbestos 

 Potential Health Effects Related to Exposure to Asbestos 

 Employee Personal Protective Equipment 

 Establishment of a Respiratory Protection Program 

 State of the Art Work Practices 

 Personal Hygiene 

 Additional Safety Hazards 

 Medical Monitoring 

 Air Monitoring 

 Relevant Federal, State and Local Regulatory Requirements, Procedures, and 
Standards 

 Asbestos Waste Disposal 

MEDICAL EXAMINATION: I have had a medical examination within the past 12 months 
which was paid for by my employer. This examination included: health history, 
occupational history, pulmonary function test, and may have included a chest xray 
evaluation. The physician issued a positive written opinion after the 
examination. 

Signature: 

Printed Name: 

Social Security Number: 

Witness: 


ATTACHMENT #3 

 

AFFIDAVIT OF MEDICAL SURVEILLANCE, RESPIRATORY PROTECTION AND 
TRAINING/ACCREDITATION 

VA PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER: 

VA MEDICAL FACILITY: 

ABATEMENT CONTRACTOR'S NAME AND ADDRESS: 

 

1. I verify that the following individual 

 Name: Social Security Number: 

 who is proposed to be employed in asbestos abatement work associated with 
the above project by the named Abatement Contractor, is included in a 
medical surveillance program in accordance with 29 CFR 1926.1101(m), and 
that complete records of the medical surveillance program as required by 
29 CFR 1926.1101(m)(n) and 29 CFR 1910.20 are kept at the offices of the 
Abatement Contractor at the following address. 

 Address: 

2. I verify that this individual has been trained, fit-tested and instructed 
in the use of all appropriate respiratory protection systems and that the 
person is capable of working in safe and healthy manner as expected and 
required in the expected work environment of this project. 

3. I verify that this individual has been trained as required by 29 CFR 
1926.1101(k). This individual has also obtained a valid State 
accreditation certificate. Documentation will be kept on-site. 

4. I verify that I meet the minimum qualifications criteria of the VA 
specifications for a CPIH. 

Signature of CPIH/CIH: Date: 

 

Printed Name of CPIH/CIH: 

 

Signature of Contractor: Date: 

 

Printed Name of Contractor: 


 

ATTACHMENT #4 

 

ABATEMENT CONTRACTOR/COMPETENT PERSON(S) REVIEW AND ACCEPTANCE OF THE VA’S 
ASBESTOS SPECIFICATIONS 

VA Project Location: 

VA Project #: 

VA Project Description: 

 

This form shall be signed by the Asbestos Abatement Contractor Owner and the 
Asbestos Abatement Contractor’s Competent Person(s) prior to any start of work 
at the VA related to this Specification. If the Asbestos Abatement 
Contractor’s/Competent Person(s) has not signed this form, they shall not be 
allowed to work on-site. 

 

I, the undersigned, have read VA’s Asbestos Specification regarding the 
asbestos abatement requirements. I understand the requirements of the VA’s 
Asbestos Specification and agree to follow these requirements as well as all 
required rules and regulations of OSHA/EPA/DOT and State/Local requirements. I 
have been given ample opportunity to read the VA’s Asbestos Specification and 
have been given an opportunity to ask any questions regarding the content and 
have received a response related to those questions. I do not have any further 
questions regarding the content, intent and requirements of the VA’s Asbestos 
Specification. 

 

At the conclusion of the asbestos abatement, I will certify that all asbestos 
abatement work was done in accordance with the VA’s Asbestos Specification and 
all ACM was removed properly and no fibrous residue remains on any abated 
surfaces. 

 

Abatement Contractor Owner’s Signature Date 

 

Abatement Contractor Competent Person(s) Date 

- - END- - - - 

 


SECTION 02 82 13.19 
ASBESTOS FLOOR TILE AND MASTIC ABATEMENT 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PART 1 - GENERAL............................................................ 1 
1.1 SUMMARY OF THE WORK..................................................... 1 
1.1.1 CONTRACT DOCUMENTS AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS........................... 1 
1.1.2 EXTENT OF WORK........................................................ 1 
1.1.3 RELATED WORK.......................................................... 1 
1.1.4 TASKS................................................................. 1 
1.1.5 ABATEMENT CONTRACTOR USE OF PREMISES.................................. 1 
1.2 VARIATIONS IN QUANTITY.................................................. 2 
PART 2 - PRODUCTS, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.................................. 2 
PART 3 - EXECUTION.......................................................... 2 
3.1 REMOVAL OF CLASS II FLOORING; ROOFING; AND TRANSITE MATERIALS:.......... 2 
3.1.1 GENERAL............................................................... 2 
3.1.2 REMOVAL OF FLOORING MATERIALS:........................................ 2 
3.1.3 REMOVAL OF MASTIC..................................................... 2 
3.2 DISPOSAL OF CLASS II WASTE MATERIAL:.................................... 3 
3.2.1 GENERAL............................................................... 3 
3.3 PROJECT DECONTAMINATION................................................. 3 
3.3.1 GENERAL............................................................... 3 
3.3.2 REGULATED AREA CLEARANCE.............................................. 3 
3.3.3 WORK DESCRIPTION...................................................... 3 
3.3.4 PRE-DECONTAMINATION CONDITIONS........................................ 3 
3.3.5 CLEANING:............................................................. 4 
3.4 VISUAL INSPECTION AND AIR CLEARANCE TESTING............................. 4 
3.4.1 GENERAL............................................................... 4 
3.4.2 VISUAL INSPECTION..................................................... 4 
3.4.3 AIR CLEARANCE TESTING................................................. 4 
3.4.4 final AIR CLEARANCE PROCEDURES........................................ 4 
3.5 ABATEMENT CLOSEOUT AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE........................ 5 
3.5.1 COMPLETION OF ABATEMENT WORK.......................................... 5 
3.5.2 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION BY CONTRACTOR............................... 5 
3.5.3 WORK SHIFTS........................................................... 5 
ATTACHMENT #1............................................................... 6 
ATTACHMENT #2............................................................... 7 
ATTACHMENT #3............................................................... 8 
ATTACHMENT #4............................................................... 9 
SECTION 02 82 13.19 

ASBESTOS FLOOR TILE AND MASTIC ABATEMENT SPECIFICATIONS 


 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

1.1.1 CONTRACT DOCUMENTS AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS 

A. Drawings, general provisions of the contract, including general and 
supplementary conditions and other Division 01 specifications, shall 
apply to the work of this section. The contract documents show the work 
to be done under the contract and related requirements and conditions 
impacting the project. 

B. Asbestos Floor Tile and Mastic Abatement Specifications 028213.19 shall 
be followed in addition to the Traditional Asbestos Abatement 
Specification 028211. 

 

1.1.2 EXTENT OF WORK 

A. Below is a brief description of the estimated quantities of asbestos 
flooring materials to be abated. These quantities are for informational 
purposes only and are based on the best information available at the 
time of the specification preparation. The Contractor shall satisfy 
himself as the actual quantities to be abated. Nothing in this section 
may be interpreted as limiting the extent of work otherwise required by 
this contract and related documents. 

 

B. Removal, clean-up and disposal of ACM flooring in an appropriate 
regulated area in the following approximate quantities: 

 

 Bldg. 1 South (JLM) 

 

 (10,400) square feet of asbestos containing & non-asbestos containing 
floor tile and associated asbestos containing mastic located on the 
ground floor within the project area. 

 

 

1.1.3 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 02 82 11, TRADITIONAL ASBESTOS ABATEMENT. 

 

1.1.4 TASKS 

 The work tasks are summarized briefly as follows: 

A. Pre-abatement activities including pre-abatement meeting(s), 
inspection(s), notifications, permits, submittal approvals, regulated 
area preparations, emergency procedures arrangements, and standard 
operating procedures for Class II asbestos abatement work. 

B. Abatement activities including removal, clean-up and disposal of ACM 
waste, recordkeeping, security, monitoring, and inspections. 

C. Cleaning and decontamination activities including final visual 
inspection, air monitoring and certification of decontamination. 

 

 

 

1.1.5 ABATEMENT CONTRACTOR USE OF PREMISES 

 


1.2 VARIATIONS IN QUANTITY 

 The quantities and locations of ACM as indicated on the drawings and 
the extent of work included in this section are estimated which are 
limited by the physical constraints imposed by occupancy of the 
buildings and accessibility to ACM. Accordingly, minor variations (+/- 
5%) in quantities of ACM within the regulated area are considered as 
having no impact on contract price and time requirements of this 
contract. Where additional work is required beyond the above variation, 
the contractor shall provide unit prices for newly discovered ACM and 
those prices shall be used for additional work required under the 
contractor. 

 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT 

Follow requirements as specified in the Traditional Asbestos Abatement 
Specification 028211 Part 2 – Products, Materials and Equipment 

 

PART 3 – EXECUTION 

Follow requirements as specified in the Traditional Asbestos Abatement 
Specification 028211 Part 3 - Execution 

 

3.3 REMOVAL OF CLASS II FLOORING, ROOFING, AND TRANSITE MATERIALS: 

3.3.1 GENERAL 

 All applicable requirements of OSHA, EPA, and DOT shall be followed 
during Class II work. Keep materials intact; do not disturb; wet while 
working with it; wrap as soon as possible with 2 layers of 6 mil 
plastic for disposal. 

 

3.3.2 REMOVAL OF FLOORING MATERIALS: 

A. All requirements of OSHA Flooring agreement provisions shall be 
followed: 

1. The Contractor shall provide enough HEPA negative air machines to 
affect > - 0.02” WCG pressure. Provide a standby unit in the event of 
machine failure and/or emergency in an adjacent area. The contractor 
shall use double the number of machines, based on their calculations, 
or submit proof their machines operate at stated capacities, at a 2" 
pressure drop across the filters. 

2. Flooring shall be removed intact, as much as possible. Do not rip or 
tear flooring. 

3. Mechanical chipping or sanding is not allowed. 

4. Wet clean and HEPA vacuum the floor before and after removal of 
flooring. 

5. Place a 6 mil poly layer 4’ by 10’ adjacent to the regulated area 
for use as a decontaminated area. All waste must be contained in 
the regulated area. 

7. Package all waste in 6 mil poly leak-tight containers for disposal. 

 

3.3.3 REMOVAL OF MASTIC 

A. The mastic removal material shall be a “low odor” or “no odor” material. 

B. A negative air machine as required under flooring removal shall be 
provided. 


C. Follow all manufacturers’ instructions in the use of the mastic removal 
material. 

D. Package all waste in 6 mil poly leak-tight container for disposal. 
E. Prior to application of any liquid material, check the floor for 
penetrations and seal before removing mastic. 


 

3.4 DISPOSAL OF CLASS II WASTE MATERIAL: 

3.4.1 GENERAL 

 Dispose of waste ACM and debris which is packaged in accordance with 
these specifications, OSHA, EPA and DOT. The landfill requirements for 
packaging must also be met. Transport will be in compliance with 49 CFR 
100–185 regulations. Disposal shall be done at an approved landfill. 
Disposal of non-friable ACM shall be done in accordance with applicable 
regulations. 

 

3.5 PROJECT DECONTAMINATION 

3.5.1 GENERAL 

 

A. The entire work related to project decontamination shall be performed 
under the close supervision and monitoring of the CPIH/CIH. 

B. If the asbestos abatement work is in an area which was contaminated 
prior to the start of abatement, the decontamination will be done by 
cleaning the primary barrier poly prior to its removal and cleanings of 
the surfaces of the regulated area after the primary barrier removal. 

C. If the asbestos abatement work is in an area which was uncontaminated 
prior to the start of abatement, the decontamination will be done by 
cleaning the primary barrier poly prior to its removal, thus preventing 
contamination of the building when the regulated area critical barriers 
are removed. 

 

3.5.2 REGULATED AREA CLEARANCE 

 Air testing and other requirements which must be met before release of 
the Contractor and re-occupancy of the regulated area space are 
specified in Final Testing Procedures. 

 

3.5.3 WORK DESCRIPTION 

 Decontamination includes the clearance air testing in the regulated 
area and the decontamination and removal of the enclosures/facilities 
installed prior to the abatement work including primary/critical 
barriers, PDF and W/EDF facilities, and negative pressure systems. 

 

3.5.4 PRE-DECONTAMINATION CONDITIONS 

A. Before decontamination starts, all ACM waste from the regulated area 
shall be removed, all waste collected and removed, and the secondary 
barrier of poly removed and disposed of along with any gross debris 
generated by the work. 

B. At the start of decontamination, the following shall be in place: 

1. Critical barriers over all openings consisting of two layers of 6 
mil poly which is the sole barrier between the regulated area and 
the rest of the building or outside. 

2. Decontamination facilities, if required for personnel and equipment 
in operating condition. 

 


3.5.5 CLEANING: 

 Clean all surfaces of the regulated area by wet methods and/or HEPA 
vacuuming. Do not use dry dusting/sweeping/air blowing methods. The 
negative pressure system shall remain in operation during this time. 
Additional cleaning(s) may be needed as determined by the 
CPIH/VPIH/CIH. 

 

3.6 VISUAL INSPECTION AND AIR CLEARANCE TESTING 

3.6.1 GENERAL 

 Notify the VA representative 24 hours in advance for the performance of 
the final visual inspection and testing. The final visual inspection 
and testing will be performed by the VPIH/CIH after the final cleaning. 

 

3.6.2 VISUAL INSPECTION 

 Final visual inspection will include the entire regulated area, the 
PDF, all poly sheeting, seals over HVAC openings, doorways, windows, 
and any other openings. If any debris, residue, dust or any other 
suspect material is detected, the final cleaning shall be repeated at 
no cost to the VA. Dust/material samples may be collected and analyzed 
at no cost to the VA at the discretion of the VPIH/CIH to confirm 
visual findings. When the regulated area is visually clean the final 
testing can be done. 

 

3.6.3 AIR CLEARANCE TESTING 

A. After an acceptable final visual inspection by the VPIH/CIH and VA 
Representative, a licensed air monitor will perform the final clearance 
testing. Air samples will be collected and analyzed in accordance with 
procedures for AHERA in this specification. If work is less than 260 
lf/160 sf/35 CF, 5 PCM samples shall be collected for clearance and a 
minimum of one field blank. If work is equal to or more than 260 lf/160 
sf/35 CF, AHERA TEM sampling shall be performed for clearance. TEM 
analysis shall be done in accordance with procedures for EPA AHERA in 
this specification. If the release criteria are not met, the Contractor 
shall repeat the final cleaning and continue decontamination procedures 
until clearance is achieved. All additional inspection and testing 
costs will be borne by the Contractor. 

B. If release criteria are met, proceed to perform the abatement closeout 
and to issue the certificate of completion in accordance with these 
specifications. 

 

3.6.4 FINAL AIR CLEARANCE PROCEDURES 

A. Contractor's Release Criteria: Work in a regulated area is complete 
when the regulated area is visually clean and airborne fiber levels 
have been reduced to or below 0.01 f/cc as measured by the AHERA PCM 
protocol, or 70 AHERA structures per square millimeter (s/mm2) by AHERA 
TEM. 


B. Air Monitoring and Final Clearance Sampling: To determine if the 
elevated airborne fiber counts encountered during abatement operations 
have been reduced to the specified level, the licensed air monitor will 
secure samples and analyze them according to the following procedures: 

1. Fibers Counted: “Fibers” referred to in this section shall be either 
all fibers regardless of composition as counted in the NIOSH 7400 
PCM method or asbestos fibers counted using the NIOSH 7400 PCM 
method. 



2. All clearance samples will be collected on 0.8. MCE filters for PCM 
analysis. A minimum of 1200 Liters of using calibrated pumps shall 
be collected for clearance samples. Before pumps are started, 
initiate aggressive air mixing sampling as detailed in 40 CFR 763 
Subpart E (AHERA) Appendix A (III)(B)(7)(d). Air samples will be 
collected in areas subject to normal air circulation away from 
corners, obstructed locations, and locations near windows, doors, or 
vents. After air sampling pumps have been shut off, circulating fans 
shall be shut off. The negative pressure system shall continue to 
operate. All results must be less than 0.01 f/cc for clearance. 

 

3.7 ABATEMENT CLOSEOUT AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE 

3.7.1 COMPLETION OF ABATEMENT WORK 

A. After thorough decontamination, complete asbestos abatement work upon 
meeting the regulated area clearance criteria and fulfilling the 
following: 

1. Remove all equipment, materials, and debris from the project area. 

2. Package and dispose of all asbestos waste as required. 

3. Repair or replace all interior finishes damaged during the abatement 
work. 

4. Fulfill other project closeout requirements as specified elsewhere 
in this specification. 

 

3.7.2 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION BY CONTRACTOR 

 The Contractor shall complete and sign the "Certificate of Completion" 
in accordance with Attachment 1 at the completion of the abatement and 
decontamination of the regulated area. 

 

3.7.3 WORK SHIFTS 

 All work shall be done during hours approved by the VA representative. 
Any change in the work schedule must be approved in writing by the VA 
Representative. 


ATTACHMENT #1 

CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION 

DATE: VA Project #: 

PROJECT NAME: Abatement Contractor: 

VAMC/ADDRESS: 

1. I certify that I have personally inspected, monitored and supervised the 
abatement work of (specify regulated area or Building): 

 which took place from / / to / / 

2. That throughout the work all applicable requirements/regulations and the 
VA's specifications were met. 

3. That any person who entered the regulated area was protected with the 
appropriate personal protective equipment and respirator and that they 
followed the proper entry and exit procedures and the proper operating 
procedures for the duration of the work. 

4. That all employees of the Abatement Contractor engaged in this work were 
trained in respiratory protection, were experienced with abatement work, 
had proper medical surveillance documentation, were fit-tested for their 
respirator, and were not exposed at any time during the work to asbestos 
without the benefit of appropriate respiratory protection. 

5. That I performed and supervised all inspection and testing specified and 
required by applicable regulations and VA specifications. 

6. That the conditions inside the regulated area were always maintained in a 
safe and healthy condition and the maximum fiber count never exceeded 0.5 
f/cc, except as described below. 

7. That all abatement work was done in accordance with OSHA requirements and 
the manufacturer’s recommendations. 

 

CPIH/CIH Signature/Date: 

 

CPIH/CIH Print Name: 

 

Abatement Contractor Signature/Date: 

 

Abatement Contractor Print Name: 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ATTACHMENT #2 

CERTIFICATE OF WORKER'S ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

PROJECT NAME: DATE: 

PROJECT ADDRESS: 

ABATEMENT CONTRACTOR'S NAME: 

WORKING WITH ASBESTOS CAN BE HAZARDOUS TO YOUR HEALTH. INHALING ASBESTOS HAS 
BEEN LINKED WITH VARIOUS TYPES OF CANCERS. IF YOU SMOKE AND INHALE ASBESTOS 
FIBERS, YOUR CHANCES OF DEVELOPING LUNG CANCER IS GREATER THAN THAT OF THE NONSMOKING 
PUBLIC. 

Your employer's contract with the owner for the above project requires that: 
You must be supplied with the proper personal protective equipment including an 
adequate respirator and be trained in its use. You must be trained in safe and 
healthy work practices and in the use of the equipment found at an asbestos 
abatement project. You must receive/have a current medical examination for 
working with asbestos. These things shall be provided at no cost to you. By 
signing this certificate you are indicating to the owner that your employer has 
met these obligations. 

RESPIRATORY PROTECTION: I have been trained in the proper use of respirators 
and have been informed of the type of respirator to be used on the above 
indicated project. I have a copy of the written Respiratory Protection Program 
issued by my employer. I have been provided for my exclusive use, at no cost, 
with a respirator to be used on the above indicated project. 

TRAINING COURSE: I have been trained by a third party, State/EPA accredited 
trainer in the requirements for an AHERA/OSHA Asbestos Abatement Worker 
training course, 32 hours minimum duration. I currently have a valid State 
accreditation certificate. The topics covered in the course include, as a 
minimum, the following: 

 Physical Characteristics and Background Information on Asbestos 

 Potential Health Effects Related to Exposure to Asbestos 

 Employee Personal Protective Equipment 

 Establishment of a Respiratory Protection Program 

 State of the Art Work Practices 

 Personal Hygiene 

 Additional Safety Hazards 

 Medical Monitoring 

 Air Monitoring 

 Relevant Federal, State and Local Regulatory Requirements, Procedures, and 
Standards 

 Asbestos Waste Disposal 

MEDICAL EXAMINATION: I have had a medical examination within the past 12 months 
which was paid for by my employer. This examination included: health history, 
occupational history, pulmonary function test, and may have included a chest xray 
evaluation. The physician issued a positive written opinion after the 
examination. 

Signature: 

Printed Name: 

Social Security Number: 

Witness: 


ATTACHMENT #3 

 

AFFIDAVIT OF MEDICAL SURVEILLANCE, RESPIRATORY PROTECTION AND 
TRAINING/ACCREDITATION 

VA PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER: 

VA MEDICAL FACILITY: 

ABATEMENT CONTRACTOR'S NAME AND ADDRESS: 

 

1. I verify that the following individual 

 Name: Social Security Number: 

 who is proposed to be employed in asbestos abatement work associated with 
the above project by the named Abatement Contractor, is included in a 
medical surveillance program in accordance with 29 CFR 1926.1101(m), and 
that complete records of the medical surveillance program as required by 
29 CFR 1926.1101(m)(n) and 29 CFR 1910.20 are kept at the offices of the 
Abatement Contractor at the following address. 

 Address: 

2. I verify that this individual has been trained, fit-tested and instructed 
in the use of all appropriate respiratory protection systems and that the 
person is capable of working in safe and healthy manner as expected and 
required in the expected work environment of this project. 

3. I verify that this individual has been trained as required by 29 CFR 
1926.1101(k). This individual has also obtained a valid State 
accreditation certificate. Documentation will be kept on-site. 

4. I verify that I meet the minimum qualifications criteria of the VA 
specifications for a CPIH. 

Signature of CPIH/CIH: Date: 

 

Printed Name of CPIH/CIH: 

 

Signature of Contractor: Date: 

 

Printed Name of Contractor: 


 

ATTACHMENT #4 

 

ABATEMENT CONTRACTOR/COMPETENT PERSON(S) REVIEW AND ACCEPTANCE OF THE VA’S 
ASBESTOS SPECIFICATIONS 

VA Project Location: 

VA Project #: 

VA Project Description: 

 

This form shall be signed by the Asbestos Abatement Contractor Owner and the 
Asbestos Abatement Contractor’s Competent Person(s) prior to any start of work 
at the VA related to this Specification. If the Asbestos Abatement 
Contractor’s/Competent Person(s) has not signed this form, they shall not be 
allowed to work on-site. 

 

I, the undersigned, have read VA’s Asbestos Specification regarding the 
asbestos abatement requirements. I understand the requirements of the VA’s 
Asbestos Specification and agree to follow these requirements as well as all 
required rules and regulations of OSHA/EPA/DOT and State/Local requirements. I 
have been given ample opportunity to read the VA’s Asbestos Specification and 
have been given an opportunity to ask any questions regarding the content and 
have received a response related to those questions. I do not have any further 
questions regarding the content, intent and requirements of the VA’s Asbestos 
Specification. 

 

At the conclusion of the asbestos abatement, I will certify that all asbestos 
abatement work was done in accordance with the VA’s Asbestos Specification and 
all ACM was removed properly and no fibrous residue remains on any abated 
surfaces. 

 

Abatement Contractor Owner’s Signature Date 

 

Abatement Contractor Competent Person(s) Date 

- - END- - - - 


SECTION 02 83 33.13 
LEAD-BASED PAINT REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies abatement and disposal of lead-based paint (LBP) 
and controls needed to limit occupational and environmental exposure to 
lead hazards. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 02 82 11, TRADITIONAL ASBESTOS ABATEMENT. 

B. Section 02 41 00, DEMOLITION. 

C. Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

1.3 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referred to in the text by basic 
designation only. 

B. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR): 

CFR 29 Part 1910........Occupational Safety and Health Standards 

CFR 29 Part 1926........Safety and Health Regulations for Construction 

CFR 40 Part 148.........Hazardous Waste Injection Restrictions 

CFR 40 Part 260.........Hazardous Waste Management System: General 

CFR 40 Part 261.........Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste 

CFR 40 Part 262.........Standards Applicable to Generators of Hazardous 
Waste 

CRF 40 Part 263.........Standards Applicable to Transporters of 
Hazardous Waste 

CFR 40 Part 264.........Standards for Owners and Operations of Hazardous 
Waste Treatment, Storage, and Disposal 
Facilities 

CFR 40 Part 265.........Interim Status Standards for Owners and 
Operators of Hazardous Waste Treatment, Storage, 
and Disposal Facilities 

CFR 40 Part 268.........Land Disposal Restrictions 

CFR 49 Part 172.........Hazardous Material Table, Special Provisions, 
Hazardous Material Communications, Emergency 
Response Information, and Training Requirements 

CFR 49 Part 178.........Specifications for Packaging 

C. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

NFPA 701-2004...........Methods of Fire Test for Flame-Resistant 
Textiles and Films 

D. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) 


NIOSH OSHA Booklet 3142. Lead in Construction 

E. Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 

UL 586-1996 (Rev 2009).. High-Efficiency, Particulate, Air Filter 
Units 

F. American National Standards Institute 

Z9.2-2006...............Fundamentals Governing the Design and Operation 
of Local Exhaust Systems 

Z88.6-2006..............Respiratory Protection 

1.4 DEFINITIONS 

A. Action Level: Employee exposure, without regard to use of respirations, 
to an airborne concentration of lead of 30 micrograms per cubic meter of 
air averaged over an 8-hour period. As used in this section,”30 
micrograms per cubic meter of air" refers to the action level. 

B. Area Monitoring: Sampling of lead concentrations within the lead control 
area and inside the physical boundaries which is representative of the 
airborne lead concentrations which may reach the breathing zone of 
personnel potentially exposed to lead. 

C. Physical Boundary: Area physically roped or partitioned off around an 
enclosed lead control area to limit unauthorized entry of personnel. As 
used in this section, "inside boundary" shall mean the same as "outside 
lead control area." 

D. Certified Industrial Hygienist (CIH): As used in this section, refers to 
an Industrial Hygienist employed by the Contractor and is certified by 
the American Board of Industrial Hygiene in comprehensive practice. 

E. Change Rooms and Shower Facilities: Rooms within the designated physical 
boundary around the lead control area equipped with separate storage 
facilities for clean protective work clothing and equipment and for 
street clothes which prevent cross- contamination. 

F. Competent Person: A person capable of identifying lead hazards in the 
work area and is authorized by the contractor to take corrective action. 

G. Decontamination Room: Room for removal of contaminated personal 
protective equipment (PPE). 

H. Eight-Hour Time Weighted Average (TWA): Airborne concentration of lead 
averaged over an 8-hour workday to which an employee is exposed. 

I. High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) Filter Equipment: HEPA filtered 
vacuuming equipment with a UL 586 filter system capable of collecting 
and retaining lead-contaminated paint dust. A high efficiency 
particulate filter means 99.97 percent efficient against 0.3 micron size 
particles. 

J. Lead: Metallic lead, inorganic lead compounds, and organic lead soaps. 
Excluded from this definition are other organic lead compounds. 


K. Lead Control Area: An enclosed area or structure with full containment 
to prevent the spread of lead dust, paint chips, or debris of leadcontaining 
paint removal operations. The lead control area is isolated 
by physical boundaries to prevent unauthorized entry of personnel. 

L. Lead Permissible Exposure Limit (PEL): Fifty micrograms per cubic meter 
of air as an 8-hour time weighted average as determined by 29 CFR 
1910.1025. If an employee is exposed for more than 8 hours in a work 
day, the PEL shall be determined by the following formula. PEL 
(micrograms/cubic meter of air) = 400/No. of hrs worked per day 

M. Personnel Monitoring: Sampling of lead concentrations within the 
breathing zone of an employee to determine the 8-hour time weighted 
average concentration in accordance with 29 CFR 1910.1025. Samples shall 
be representative of the employee's work tasks. Breathing zone shall be 
considered an area within a hemisphere, forward of the shoulders, with a 
radius of 150 mm to 225 mm (6 to 9 inches) and the center at the nose or 
mouth of an employee. 

1.5 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Before exposure to lead-contaminated dust, provide workers with a 
comprehensive medical examination as required by 29 CFR 1926.62 (I) (1) 
(i) & (ii). The examination shall not be required if adequate records 
show that employees have been examined as required by 29 CFR 1926.62(I) 
without the last year. 

B. Medical Records: Maintain complete and accurate medical records of 
employees in accordance with 29 CFR 1910.20. 

C. CIH Responsibilities: The Contractor shall employ a certified Industrial 
Hygienist who will be responsible for the following: 

1. Certify Training. 

2. Review and approve lead-containing paint removal plan for conformance 
to the applicable referenced standards. 

3. Inspect lead-containing paint removal work for conformance with the 
approved plan. 

4. Direct monitoring. 

5. Ensure work is performed in strict accordance with specifications at 
all times. 

6. Ensure hazardous exposure to personnel and to the environment are 
adequately controlled at all times. 

D. Training: Train each employee performing paint removal, disposal, and 
air sampling operations prior to the time of initial job assignment, in 
accordance with 29 CFR 1926.62. 

E. Training Certification: Submit certificates signed and dated by the CIH 
and by each employee stating that the employee has received training. 


F. Respiratory Protection Program: 

1. Furnish each employee required to wear a negative pressure respirator 
or other appropriate type with a respirator fit test at the time of 
initial fitting and at least every 6 months thereafter as required by 
29 CFR 1926.62. 

2. Establish and implement a respiratory protection program as required 
by 29 CFR 1910.134, 29 CFR 1910.1025, and 29 CFR 1926.62. 

G. Hazard Communication Program: Establish and implement a Hazard 
Communication Program as required by 29 CFR 1910.1200. 

H. Hazardous Waste Management: The Hazardous Waste Management plan shall 
comply with applicable requirements of Federal, State, and local 
hazardous waste regulations and address: 

1. Identification of hazardous wastes associated with the work. 

2. Estimated quantities of wastes to be generated and disposed of. 

3. Names and qualifications of each contractor that will be 
transporting, storing, treating, and disposing of the wastes. Include 
the facility location and a 24-hour point of contact. Furnish two 
copies of EPA, and state hazardous waste disposal manifests. 

4. Names and qualifications (experience and training) of personnel who 
will be working on-site with hazardous wastes. 

5. List of waste handling equipment to be used in performing the work, 
to include cleaning, volume reduction, and transport equipment. 

6. Spill prevention, containment, and cleanup contingency measures to be 
implemented. 

7. Work plan and schedule for waste containment, removal and disposal. 
Wastes shall be cleaned up and containerized daily. 

8. Cost for hazardous waste disposal according to this plan. 

I. Safety and Health Compliance: 

 26 CFR 1926 

 26 CFR 1910 

 

1. In addition to the detailed requirements of this specification, 
comply with laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations of federal, 
state, and local authorities regarding removing, handling, storing, 
transporting, and disposing of lead waste materials. Comply with the 
applicable requirements of the current issue of 29 CFR 1910.1025. 
Submit matters regarding interpretation of standards to the 
Contracting Officer for resolution before starting work. 

2. Where specification requirements and the referenced documents vary, 
the most stringent requirements shall apply. 


J. Pre-Construction Conference: Along with the CIH, meet with the 
Contracting Officer to discuss in detail the lead-containing paint 
removal work plan, including work procedures and precautions for the 
work plan. 

1.6 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit the following in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, 
PRODUCT DATA, and SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Catalog Data: 

 Vacuum filters 

 Respirators 

C. Instructions: Paint removal materials. Include applicable material 
safety data sheets. 

D. Statements Certifications and Statements: 

1. Qualifications of CIH: Submit name, address, and telephone number of 
the CIH selected to perform responsibilities in paragraph entitled 
"CIH Responsibilities." Provide previous experience of the CIH. 
Submit proper documentation that the Industrial Hygienist is 
certified by the American Board of Industrial Hygiene in 
comprehensive practice, including certification number and date of 
certification/recertification. 

2. Testing Laboratory: Submit the name, address, and telephone number of 
the testing laboratory selected to perform the monitoring, testing, 
and reporting of airborne concentrations of lead. Provide proper 
documentation that persons performing the analysis have been judged 
proficient by successful participation within the last year in the 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) 
Proficiency Analytical Testing (PAT) Program. The laboratory shall be 
accredited by the American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA). 
Provide AIHA documentation along with date of 
accreditation/reaccreditation. 

3. Lead-Containing Paint Removal Plan: 

a. Submit a detailed job-specific plan of the work procedures to be 
used in the removal of lead-containing paint. The plan shall 
include a sketch showing the location, size, and details of lead 
control areas, location and details of decontamination rooms, 
change rooms, shower facilities, and mechanical ventilation 
system. 

b. Include in the plan, eating, drinking, smoking and restroom 
procedures, interface of trades, sequencing of lead related work, 
collected wastewater and paint debris disposal plan, air sampling 
plan, respirators, protective equipment, and a detailed 


description of the method of containment of the operation to 
ensure that airborne lead concentrations of 30 micrograms per 
cubic meter of air are not exceeded outside of the lead control 
area. 

c. Include air sampling, training and strategy, sampling methodology, 
frequency, duration of sampling, and qualifications of air 
monitoring personnel in the air sampling portion on the plan. 

4. Field Test Reports: Monitoring Results: Submit monitoring results to 
the Contracting Officer within 3 working days, signed by the testing 
laboratory employee performing the air monitoring, the employee that 
analyzed the sample, and the CIH. 

5. Records: 

a. Completed and signed hazardous waste manifest from treatment or 
disposal facility. 

b. Certification of Medical Examinations. 

c. Employee training certification. 

PART 2 PRODUCTS 

 PAINT REMOVAL PRODUCTS: Submit applicable Material Safety Data Sheets 
for paint removal products used in paint removal work. Use the least 
toxic product, suitable for the job and acceptable to the Industrial 
Hygienist. 

 

PART 3 EXECUTION 

3.1 PROTECTION 

A. Notification: Notify the Contracting Officer 10 days prior to the start 
of any paint removal work. 

B. Lead Control Area Requirements. 

1. Establish a lead control area by completely enclosing the project 
area with containment screens completely sealing the area or 
structure where lead-containing paint removal operations will be 
performed. 

2. Contain removal operations by the use of a negative pressure full 
containment system with at least one change room and with HEPA 
filtered exhaust. 

C. Protection of Existing Work to Remain: Perform paint removal work 
without damage or contamination of adjacent areas. Where existing work 
is damaged or contaminated, restore work to its original condition. 

D. Boundary Requirements: Provide physical boundaries around the lead 
control area by roping off the area [designated on the drawings] or 
providing curtains, portable partitions or other enclosures to ensure 


that airborne concentrations of lead will not reach 30 micrograms per 
cubic meter of air outside of the lead control area. 

E. Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning (HVAC) Systems: Shut down, 
lock out, and isolate HVAC systems that supply, exhaust, or pass through 
the lead control areas. Seal intake and exhaust vents in the lead 
control area with 6-mil plastic sheet and tape. Seal seams in HVAC 
components that pass through the lead control area. 

F. Change Room and Shower Facilities: Provide clean change rooms and shower 
facilities within the physical boundary around the designated lead 
control area in accordance with requirements of 29 CFR 1926.62. 

G. Mechanical Ventilation System: 

1. Use adequate ventilation to control personnel exposure to lead in 
accordance with 29 CFR 1926.57. 

2. To the extent feasible, use fixed local exhaust ventilation connected 
to HEPA filters or other collection systems, approved by the 
industrial hygienist. Local exhaust ventilation systems shall be 
designed, constructed, installed, and maintained in accordance with 
ANSI Z9.2. 

3. If air from exhaust ventilation is recirculated into the work place, 
the system shall have a high efficiency filter with reliable back-up 
filter and controls to monitor the concentration of lead in the 
return air and to bypass the recirculation system automatically if it 
fails. Air may be recirculated only where exhaust to the outside is 
not feasible. 

H. Personnel Protection: Personnel shall wear and use protective clothing 
and equipment as specified herein. Eating, smoking, or drinking is not 
permitted in the lead control area. No one will be permitted in the lead 
control area unless they have been given appropriate training and 
protective equipment. 

I. Warning Signs: Provide warning signs at approaches to lead control 
areas. Locate signs at such a distance that personnel may read the sign 
and take the necessary precautions before entering the area. Signs shall 
comply with the requirements of 29 CFR 1926.62. 

3.2 WORK PROCEDURES 

A. Perform removal of lead-containing paint in accordance with approved 
lead-containing paint removal plan. Use procedures and equipment 
required to limit occupational and environmental exposure to lead when 
lead- containing paint is removed in accordance with 29 CFR 1926.62, 
except as specified herein. Dispose of removed paint chips and 
associated waste in compliance with Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), federal, state, and local requirements. 


B. Personnel Exiting Procedures: 

1. Whenever personnel exit the lead-controlled area, they shall perform 
the following procedures and shall not leave the work place wearing 
any clothing or equipment worn during the work day: 

a. Vacuum themselves off. 

b. Remove protective clothing in the decontamination room, and place 
them in an approved impermeable disposal bag. 

c. Shower. 

d. Change to clean clothes prior to leaving the physical boundary 
designated around the lead-contaminated job site. 

C. Monitoring: Monitoring of airborne concentrations of lead shall be in 
accordance with 29 CFR 1910.1025 and as specified herein. Air 
monitoring, testing, and reporting shall be performed by a CIH or an 
Industrial Hygiene (IH) Technician who is under the direction of the 
CIH: 

1. The CIH or the IH Technician under the direction of the CIH shall be 
on the job site directing the monitoring, and inspecting the leadcontaining 
paint removal work to ensure that the requirements of the 
Contract have been satisfied during the entire lead-containing paint 
removal operation. 

2. Take personal air monitoring samples on employees who are anticipated 
to have the greatest risk of exposure as determined by the CIH. In 
addition, take air monitoring samples on at least 25 percent of the 
work crew or a minimum of two employees, whichever is greater, during 
each work shift. 

3. Submit results of air monitoring samples, signed by the CIH, within 
24 hours after the air samples are taken. Notify the Contracting 
Officer immediately of exposure to lead at or in excess of the action 
level of 30 micrograms per cubic meter of air outside of the lead 
control area. 

 

 

D. Monitoring During Paint Removal Work: 

1. Perform personal and area monitoring during the entire paint removal 
operation. Sufficient area monitoring shall be conducted at the 
physical boundary to ensure unprotected personnel are not exposed 
above 30 micrograms per cubic meter of air at all times. If the 
outside boundary lead levels are at or exceed 30 micrograms per cubic 
meter of air, work shall be stopped and the CIH shall immediately 
correct the condition(s) causing the increased levels and notify the 
Contracting Officer immediately. 


2. The CIH shall review the sampling data collected on that day to 
determine if condition(s) requires any further change in work 
methods. Removal work shall resume when approval is given by the CIH. 
The Contractor shall control the lead level outside of the work 
boundary to less than 30 micrograms per cubic meter of air at all 
times. As a minimum, conduct area monitoring daily on each shift in 
which lead paint removal operations are performed in areas 
immediately adjacent to the lead control area. 

3. For outdoor operations, at least one sample on each shift shall be 
taken on the downwind side of the lead control area. If adjacent 
areas are contaminated, clean and visually inspect contaminated 
areas. The CIH shall certify that the area has been cleaned of lead 
contamination. 

3.3 LEAD-CONTAINING PAINT REMOVAL 

A. Remove paint within the areas designated on the drawings in order to 
completely expose the substrate. Take whatever precautions are necessary 
to minimize damage to the underlying substrate. 

B. Indoor Lead Paint Removal: Select paint removal processes to minimize 
contamination of work areas with lead-contaminated dust or other leadcontaminated 
debris/waste. This paint removal process should be 
described in the lead-containing paint removal plan. Perform manual 
sanding and scraping to the maximum extent feasible. 

C. Mechanical Paint Removal and Blast Cleaning: Perform mechanical paint 
removal and blast cleaning in lead control areas using negative pressure 
full containments with HEPA filtered exhaust. Collect paint residue and 
spent grit (used abrasive) from blasting operations for disposal in 
accordance with EPA, state and local requirements. 

D. Outside Lead Paint Removal: Select removal processes to minimize 
contamination of work areas with lead-contaminated dust or other leadcontaminated 
debris/waste. This paint removal process should be 
described in the lead-containing paint removal plan. Perform manual 
sanding and scraping to the maximum extent feasible. 

 

 

3.5 CLEANUP AND DISPOSAL 

A. Cleanup: Maintain surfaces of the lead control area free of 
accumulations of paint chips and dust. Restrict the spread of dust and 
debris; keep waste from being distributed over the work area. Do not dry 
sweep or use compressed air to clean up the area. At the end of each 
shift and when the paint removal operation has been completed, clean the 


area of visible lead paint contamination by vacuuming with a HEPA 
filtered vacuum cleaner and wet mopping the area. 

B. Certification: The CIH shall certify in writing that the inside and 
outside the lead control area air monitoring samples are less than 30 
micrograms per cubic meter of air, the respiratory protection for the 
employees was adequate, the work procedures were performed in accordance 
with 29 CFR 1926.62, and that there were no visible accumulations of 
lead-contaminated paint and dust on the worksite. Do not remove the lead 
control area or roped-off boundary and warning signs prior to the 
Contracting Officer's receipt of the CIH's certification. Reclean areas 
showing dust or residual paint chips. 

C. Testing of Lead-Containing Paint Residue and Used Abrasive Where 
indicated or when directed by the Contracting Officer, test lead 
containing paint residue and used abrasive in accordance with 40 CFR 261 
for hazardous waste. 

D. Disposal: 

1. Collect lead-contaminated waste, scrap, debris, bags, containers, 
equipment, and lead-contaminated clothing, which may produce airborne 
concentrations of lead particles. 

2. Store removed paint, lead-contaminated clothing and equipment, and 
lead-contaminated dust and cleaning debris into U.S. Department of 
Transportation (49 CFR 178) approved 55-gallon drums. Properly labels 
each drum to identify the type of waste (49 CFR 172) and the date 
lead-contaminated wastes were first put into the drum. Obtain and 
complete the Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest forms from [Activity 
Staff Civil Engineer located at Building 1, Fort Roots, North Little 
Rock, AR. Comply with land disposal restriction notification 
requirements as required by 40 CFR 268: 

a. At least 14 days prior to delivery, notify the Contracting Officer 
who will arrange for job site inspection of the drums and 
manifests by [PWC Hazardous Waste Storage Facility personnel] 
To Be Determined by Contractor 

b. As necessary, make lot deliveries of hazardous wastes to the // 
PWC Hazardous Waste Storage Facility To Be Determined By 
Contractor to ensure that drums do not remain on the jobsite 
longer than 90 calendar days from the date affixed to each drum. 

 

a. Collect lead-contaminated waste, scrap, debris, bags, containers, 
equipment, and lead-contaminated clothing which may produce 
airborne concentrations of lead particles. Label the containers in 
accordance with 29 CFR 1926.62. Dispose of lead-contaminated waste 


material at a EPA approved hazardous waste treatment, storage, or 
disposal facility off Government property. 

b. Store waste materials in U.S. Department of Transportation (49 CFR 
178) approved 55-gallon drums. Properly label each drum to 
identify the type of waste (49 CFR 172) and the date the drum was 
filled. The Contracting Officer or an authorized representative 
will assign an area for interim storage of waste-containing drums. 
Do not store hazardous waste drums in interim storage longer than 
90 calendar days from the date affixed to each drum. 

 

E. Disposal Documentation Submit written evidence that the hazardous waste 
treatment, storage, or disposal facility (TSD) is approved for lead 
disposal by the EPA and state or local regulatory agencies. Submit one 
copy of the completed manifest, signed and dated by the initial 
transporter in accordance with 40 CFR 262. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 05 50 00 
METAL FABRICATIONS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies items and assemblies fabricated from structural 
steel shapes and other materials as shown and specified. 

B. Items specified. 

1. Support for Wall and Ceiling Mounted Items: 

2. Ceiling Hatch 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Colors, finishes, and textures: Section 09 06 00, SCHEDULE FOR 
FINISHES. 

B. Prime and finish painting: Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

C. Stainless steel corner guards: Section 10 26 00, WALL AND DOOR 
PROTECTION. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

 

Ceiling hatch 



 

C. Shop Drawings: 

1. Each item specified, showing complete detail, location in the 
project, material and size of components, method of joining various 
components and assemblies, finish, and location, size and type of 
anchors. 

2. Mark items requiring field assembly for erection identification and 
furnish erection drawings and instructions. 

3. Provide templates and rough-in measurements as required. 

D. Furnish setting drawings and instructions for installation of anchors 
to be preset into concrete and masonry work, and for the positioning of 
items having anchors to be built into concrete or masonry construction. 

1.4 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Each manufactured product shall meet, as a minimum, the requirements 
specified, and shall be a standard commercial product of a manufacturer 
regularly presently manufacturing items of type specified. 


B. Each product type shall be the same and be made by the same 
manufacturer. 

C. Assembled product to the greatest extent possible before delivery to 
the site. 

D. Include additional features, which are not specifically prohibited by 
this specification, but which are a part of the manufacturer's standard 
commercial product. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

B18.6.1-97..............Wood Screws 

B18.2.2-87(R2005).......Square and Hex Nuts 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A36/A36M-12.............Structural Steel 

A47-99(R2009)...........Malleable Iron Castings 

A48-03(R2012)...........Gray Iron Castings 

A123-12.................Zinc (Hot-Dip Galvanized) Coatings on Iron and 
Steel Products 

A307-12.................Carbon Steel Bolts and Studs, 60,000 PSI 
Tensile Strength 

A391/A391M-07(R2012)....Grade 80 Alloy Steel Chain 

A786/A786M-09...........Rolled Steel Floor Plate 

B221-13.................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, 
Rods, Wire, Shapes, and Tubes 

B632-08.................Aluminum-Alloy Rolled Tread Plate 

F436-11.................Hardened Steel Washers 

F468-06(R2012)..........Nonferrous Bolts, Hex Cap Screws, Socket Head 
Cap Screws and Studs for General Use 

F593-13.................Stainless Steel Bolts, Hex Cap Screws, and 
Studs 

F1667-11................Driven Fasteners: Nails, Spikes and Staples 

D. American Welding Society (AWS): 

D1.1-10.................Structural Welding Code Steel 

D1.2-08.................Structural Welding Code Aluminum 

D1.3-08.................Structural Welding Code Sheet Steel 

E. National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM) 


AMP 500-06..............Metal Finishes Manual 

F. Structural Steel Painting Council (SSPC)/Society of Protective 
Coatings: 

SP 1-04.................No. 1, Solvent Cleaning 

SP 2-04.................No. 2, Hand Tool Cleaning 

SP 3-04.................No. 3, Power Tool Cleaning 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. Structural Steel: ASTM A36. 

B. Stainless Steel: ASTM A240, Type 302 or 304. 

C. Aluminum, Extruded: ASTM B221, Alloy 6063-T5 unless otherwise 
specified. For structural shapes use alloy 6061-T6 and alloy 6061- 
T4511. 

D. Primer Paint: As specified in Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

E. Modular Channel Units: 

1. Factory fabricated, channel shaped, cold formed sheet steel shapes, 
complete with fittings bolts and nuts required for assembly. 

2. Form channel within turned pyramid shaped clamping ridges on each 
side. 

3. Provide case hardened steel nuts with serrated grooves in the top 
edges designed to be inserted in the channel at any point and be 
given a quarter turn so as to engage the channel clamping ridges. 
Provide each nut with a spring designed to hold the nut in place. 

4. Factory finish channels and parts with oven baked primer when 
exposed to view. Channels fabricated of ASTM A525, G90 galvanized 
steel may have primer omitted in concealed locations. Finish screws 
and nuts with zinc coating. 

5. Fabricate snap-in closure plates to fit and close exposed channel 
openings of not more than 0.3 mm (0.0125 inch) thick stainless 
steel. 

2.2 HARDWARE 

A. Rough Hardware: 

1. Furnish rough hardware with a standard plating, applied after 
punching, forming and assembly of parts; galvanized, cadmium plated, 
or zinc-coated by electro-galvanizing process. Galvanized G-90 where 
specified. 

2. Use G60 galvanized coating on ferrous metal for exterior work unless 
non-ferrous metal or stainless is used. 


B. Fasteners: 

1. Bolts with Nuts: 

a. ASME B18.2.2. 

b. ASTM A307 for 415 MPa (60,000 psi) tensile strength bolts. 

c. ASTM F468 for nonferrous bolts. 

d. ASTM F593 for stainless steel. 

2. Screws: ASME B18.6.1. 

3. Washers: ASTM F436, type to suit material and anchorage. 

4. Nails: ASTM F1667, Type I, style 6 or 14 for finish work. 

2.3 FABRICATION GENERAL 

A. Material 

1. Use material as specified. Use material of commercial quality and 
suitable for intended purpose for material that is not named or its 
standard of quality not specified. 

2. Use material free of defects which could affect the appearance or 
service ability of the finished product. 

B. Size: 

1. Size and thickness of members as shown. 

2. When size and thickness is not specified or shown for an individual 
part, use size and thickness not less than that used for the same 
component on similar standard commercial items or in accordance with 
established shop methods. 

C. Connections 

1. Except as otherwise specified, connections may be made by welding, 
riveting or bolting. 

2. Field riveting will not be approved. 

3. Design size, number and placement of fasteners, to develop a joint 
strength of not less than the design value. 

4. Holes, for rivets and bolts: Accurately punched or drilled and burrs 
removed. 

5. Size and shape welds to develop the full design strength of the 
parts connected by welds and to transmit imposed stresses without 
permanent deformation or failure when subject to service loadings. 

6. Use Rivets and bolts of material selected to prevent corrosion 
(electrolysis) at bimetallic contacts. Plated or coated material 
will not be approved. 

7. Use stainless steel connectors for removable members machine screws 
or bolts. 


D. Fasteners and Anchors 

1. Use methods for fastening or anchoring metal fabrications to 
building construction as shown or specified. 

2. Where fasteners and anchors are not shown, design the type, size, 
location and spacing to resist the loads imposed without deformation 
of the members or causing failure of the anchor or fastener, and 
suit the sequence of installation. 

3. Use material and finish of the fasteners compatible with the kinds 
of materials which are fastened together and their location in the 
finished work. 

4. Fasteners for securing metal fabrications to new construction only, 
may be by use of threaded or wedge type inserts or by anchors for 
welding to the metal fabrication for installation before the 
concrete is placed or as masonry is laid. 

5. Fasteners for securing metal fabrication to existing construction or 
new construction may be expansion bolts, toggle bolts, power 
actuated drive pins, welding, self drilling and tapping screws or 
bolts. 

E. Workmanship 

1. General: 

a. Fabricate items to design shown. 

b. Furnish members in longest lengths commercially available within 
the limits shown and specified. 

c. Fabricate straight, true, free from warp and twist, and where 
applicable square and in same plane. 

d. Provide holes, sinkages and reinforcement shown and required for 
fasteners and anchorage items. 

e. Provide openings, cut-outs, and tapped holes for attachment and 
clearances required for work of other trades. 

f. Prepare members for the installation and fitting of hardware. 

g. Cut openings in gratings and floor plates for the passage of 
ducts, sumps, pipes, conduits and similar items. Provide 
reinforcement to support cut edges. 

h. Fabricate surfaces and edges free from sharp edges, burrs and 
projections which may cause injury. 

2. Welding: 

a. Weld in accordance with AWS. 


b. Welds shall show good fusion, be free from cracks and porosity 
and accomplish secure and rigid joints in proper alignment. 

c. Where exposed in the finished work, continuous weld for the full 
length of the members joined and have depressed areas filled and 
protruding welds finished smooth and flush with adjacent 
surfaces. 

d. Finish welded joints to match finish of adjacent surface. 

3. Joining: 

a. Miter or butt members at corners. 

b. Where frames members are butted at corners, cut leg of frame 
member perpendicular to surface, as required for clearance. 

4. Anchors: 

a. Where metal fabrications are shown to be preset in concrete, weld 
32 x 3 mm (1-1/4 by 1/8 inch) steel strap anchors, 150 mm (6 
inches) long with 25 mm (one inch) hooked end, to back of member 
at 600 mm (2 feet) on center, unless otherwise shown. 

b. Where metal fabrications are shown to be built into masonry use 
32 x 3 mm (1-1/4 by 1/8 inch) steel strap anchors, 250 mm (10 
inches) long with 50 mm (2 inch) hooked end, welded to back of 
member at 600 mm (2 feet) on center, unless otherwise shown. 

5. Cutting and Fitting: 

a. Accurately cut, machine and fit joints, corners, copes, and 
miters. 

b. Fit removable members to be easily removed. 

c. Design and construct field connections in the most practical 
place for appearance and ease of installation. 

d. Fit pieces together as required. 

e. Fabricate connections for ease of assembly and disassembly 
without use of special tools. 

f. Joints firm when assembled. 

g. Conceal joining, fitting and welding on exposed work as far as 
practical. 

h. Do not show rivets and screws prominently on the exposed face. 

i. The fit of components and the alignment of holes shall eliminate 
the need to modify component or to use exceptional force in the 
assembly of item and eliminate the need to use other than common 
tools. 

F. Finish: 


1. Finish exposed surfaces in accordance with NAAMM AMP 500 Metal 
Finishes Manual. 

2. Aluminum: NAAMM AMP 501. 

a. Mill finish, AA-M10, as fabricated, use unless specified 
otherwise. 

b. Clear anodic coating, AA-C22A41, chemically etched medium matte, 
with Architectural Class 1, 0.7 mils or thicker. 

c. Colored anodic coating, AA-C22A42, chemically etched medium matte 
with Architectural Class 1, 0.7 mils or thicker. 

d. Painted: AA-C22R10. 

3. Steel and Iron: NAAMM AMP 504. 

a. Zinc coated (Galvanized): ASTM A123, G90 unless noted otherwise. 

b. Surfaces exposed in the finished work: 

1) Finish smooth rough surfaces and remove projections. 

2) Fill holes, dents and similar voids and depressions with epoxy 
type patching compound. 

c. Shop Prime Painting: 

1) Surfaces of Ferrous metal: 

a) Items not specified to have other coatings. 

b) Galvanized surfaces specified to have prime paint. 

c) Remove all loose mill scale, rust, and paint, by hand or 
power tool cleaning as defined in SSPC-SP2 and SP3. 

d) Clean of oil, grease, soil and other detrimental matter by 
use of solvents or cleaning compounds as defined in SSPCSP1. 


e) After cleaning and finishing apply one coat of primer as 
specified in Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

2) Non ferrous metals: Comply with MAAMM-500 series. 

4. Stainless Steel: NAAMM AMP-504 Finish No. 4. 

G. Protection: 

1. Insulate aluminum surfaces that will come in contact with concrete, 
masonry, plaster, or metals other than stainless steel, zinc or 
white bronze by giving a coat of heavy-bodied alkali resisting 
bituminous paint or other approved paint in shop. 

2. Spot prime all abraded and damaged areas of zinc coating which 
expose the bare metal, using zinc rich paint on hot-dip zinc coat 
items and zinc dust primer on all other zinc coated items. 


2.4 SUPPORTS 

A. General: 

1. Fabricate ASTM A36 structural steel shapes as shown. 

2. Use clip angles or make provisions for welding hangers and braces to 
overhead construction. 

3. Field connections may be welded or bolted. 

B. For Wall Mounted Items: 

1. For items supported by metal stud partitions. 

2. Steel strip or hat channel minimum of 1.5 mm (0.0598 inch) thick. 

3. Steel strip minimum of 150 mm (6 inches) wide, length extending one 
stud space beyond end of item supported. 

4. Steel hat channels where shown. Flange cut and flatted for anchorage 
to stud. 

5. Structural steel tube or channel for grab bar at water closets floor 
to structure above with clip angles or end plates formed for 
anchors. 

6. Use steel angles for thru wall counters. Drill angle for fasteners 
at ends and not over 100 mm (4 inches) on center between ends. 

C. For Intravenous Track and Cubical Curtain Track: 

1. Fabricate assembly of steel angle as shown. 

2. Drill angle bent ends for anchor screws to acoustical suspension 
system and angle for hanger wires. 

3. Provide pipe sleeve welded to angle. 

D. Supports for Accordion Partition Tracks, Exercise Equipment, and Items 
at Various Conditions at Suspended Ceilings: 

1. Fabricate of structural steel shapes as shown. 

2. Drill for anchor bolts of suspended item. 

 


3.1 INSTALLATION OF SUPPORTS 

A. Anchorage to structure. 

1. Secure angles or channels and clips to overhead structural steel by 
continuous welding unless bolting is shown. 

2. Secure supports to concrete inserts by bolting or continuous welding 
as shown. 

3. Secure supports to mid height of concrete beams when inserts do not 
exist with expansion bolts and to slabs, with expansion bolts. 
unless shown otherwise. 

4. Secure steel plate or hat channels to studs as detailed. 

B. Supports for Wall Mounted items: 

1. Locate center of support at anchorage point of supported item. 

2. Locate support at top and bottom of wall hung cabinets. 

3. Locate support at top of floor cabinets and shelving installed 
against walls. 

4. Locate supports where required for items shown. 

C. Supports for intravenous (IV) Track and Cubicle Curtain Track: 

1. Install assembly where shown after ceiling suspension grid is 
installed. 

2. Drill angle for bolt and weld nut to angle prior to installation of 
tile. 

D. Support for cantilever grab bars: 

1. Locate channels or tube in partition for support as shown, and 
extend full height from floor to underside of structural slab above. 

2. Anchor at top and bottom with angle clips bolted to channels or tube 
with two, 9 mm (3/8 inch) diameter bolts. 

3. Anchor to floors and overhead construction with two 9 mm (3/8 inch) 
diameter bolts. 

4. Fasten clips to concrete with expansion bolts, and to steel with 

3.2 STEEL COMPONENTS FOR MILLWORK ITEMS 

Coordinate and deliver to Millwork fabricator for assembly where 
millwork items are secured to metal fabrications. 

3.3 CLEAN AND ADJUSTING 

A. Adjust movable parts including hardware to operate as designed without 
binding or deformation of the members centered in the opening or frame 
and, where applicable, contact surfaces fit tight and even without 
forcing or warping the components. 


B. Clean after installation exposed prefinished and plated items and items 
fabricated from stainless steel, aluminum and copper alloys, as 
recommended by the metal manufacture and protected from damage until 
completion of the project. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 06 10 00 
ROUGH CARPENTRY 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION: 

Section specifies wood blocking, framing, sheathing, furring, nailers, 
sub-flooring, rough hardware, and light wood construction. 

1.2 RELATED WORK: 

A. Milled woodwork: Section 06 20 00, FINISH CARPENTRY. 

B. Gypsum sheathing: Section 09 29 00, GYPSUM BOARD. 

C. Cement board sheathing: Section 06 16 63, CEMENTITIOUS SHEATHING. 

1.3 SUMBITTALS: 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings showing framing connection details, fasteners, connections 
and dimensions. 

1.4 PRODUCT DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING: 

A. Protect lumber and other products from dampness both during and after 
delivery at site. 

B. Pile lumber in stacks in such manner as to provide air circulation 
around surfaces of each piece. 

C. Stack plywood and other board products so as to prevent warping. 

D. Locate stacks on well drained areas, supported at least 150 mm (6 
inches) above grade and cover with well ventilated sheds having firmly 
constructed over hanging roof with sufficient end wall to protect lumber 
from driving rain. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS: 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by basic designation 
only. 

B. American Forest and Paper Association (AFPA): 

National Design Specification for Wood Construction 

NDS-05..................Conventional Wood Frame Construction 

C. American Institute of Timber Construction (AITC): 

A190.1-07...............Structural Glued Laminated Timber 

D. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

B18.2.1-96(R2005).......Square and Hex Bolts and Screws 

B18.2.2-87..............Square and Hex Nuts 

B18.6.1-97..............Wood Screws 


B18.6.4-98(R2005).......Thread Forming and Thread Cutting Tapping Screws 
and Metallic Drive Screws 

E. American Plywood Association (APA): 

E30-07..................Engineered Wood Construction Guide 

F. American Society for Testing And Materials (ASTM): 

A47-99(R2009)...........Ferritic Malleable Iron Castings 

A48-03(R2008)...........Gray Iron Castings 

A653/A653M-10...........Steel Sheet Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) or Zinc- 
Iron Alloy Coated (Galvannealed) by the Hot Dip 
Process 

C954-10.................Steel Drill Screws for the Application of Gypsum 
Board or Metal Plaster Bases to Steel Studs from 
0.033 inch (2.24 mm) to 0.112-inch (2.84 mm) in 
thickness 

C1002-07................Steel Self-Piercing Tapping Screws for the 
Application of Gypsum Panel Products or Metal 
Plaster Bases to Wood Studs or Metal Studs 

D143-09.................Small Clear Specimens of Timber, Method of 
Testing 

D1760-01................Pressure Treatment of Timber Products 

D2559-10................Adhesives for Structural Laminated Wood Products 
for Use Under Exterior (Wet Use) Exposure 
Conditions 

D3498-11................Adhesives for Field-Gluing Plywood to Lumber 
Framing for Floor Systems 

F844-07.................Washers, Steel, Plan (Flat) Unhardened for 
General Use 

F1667-08................Nails, Spikes, and Staples 

G. Federal Specifications (Fed. Spec.): 

MM-L-736C...............Lumber; Hardwood 

H. Commercial Item Description (CID): 


A-A-55615...............Shield, Expansion (Wood Screw and Lag Bolt Self 
Threading Anchors) 

I. Military Specification (Mil. Spec.): 

MIL-L-19140E............Lumber and Plywood, Fire-Retardant Treated 

J. Truss Plate Institute (TPI): 

TPI-85..................Metal Plate Connected Wood Trusses 

K. U.S. Department of Commerce Product Standard (PS) 

PS 1-95.................Construction and Industrial Plywood 

PS 20-05................American Softwood Lumber Standard 


PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 LUMBER: 

A. Unless otherwise specified, each piece of lumber bear grade mark, stamp, 
or other identifying marks indicating grades of material, and rules or 
standards under which produced. 

1. Identifying marks in accordance with rule or standard under which 
material is produced, including requirements for qualifications and 
authority of the inspection organization, usage of authorized 
identification, and information included in the identification. 

2. Inspection agency for lumber approved by the Board of Review, 
American Lumber Standards Committee, to grade species used. 

 

B. Lumber Other Than Structural: 

1. Unless otherwise specified, species graded under the grading rules of 
an inspection agency approved by Board of Review, American Lumber 
Standards Committee. 

2. Furring, blocking, nailers and similar items 100 mm (4 inches) and 
narrower Standard Grade; and, members 150 mm (6 inches) and wider, 
Number 2 Grade. 

C. Sizes: 

1. Conforming to Prod. Std., PS20. 

2. Size references are nominal sizes, unless otherwise specified, actual 
sizes within manufacturing tolerances allowed by standard under which 
produced. 

D. Moisture Content: 

1. At time of delivery and maintained at the site. 

2. Boards and lumber 50 mm (2 inches) and less in thickness: 19 percent 
or less. 

3. Lumber over 50 mm (2 inches) thick: 25 percent or less. 

E. Fire Retardant Treatment: 

1. Mil Spec. MIL-L-19140 with piece of treated material bearing 
identification of testing agency and showing performance rating. 

2. Treatment and performance inspection, by an independent and qualified 
testing agency that establishes performance ratings. 

F. Preservative Treatment: 

1. Do not treat Heart Redwood and Western Red Cedar. 

2. Treat wood members and plywood exposed to weather or in contact with 
plaster, masonry or concrete, including framing of open roofed 
structures; sills, sole plates, furring, and sleepers that are less 
than 600 mm (24 inches) from ground; nailers, edge strips, blocking, 


crickets, curbs, cant, vent strips and other members used in 
connection with roofing and flashing materials. 

3. Treat other members specified as preservative treated (PT). 

4. Preservative treat by the pressure method complying with ASTM D1760, 
except any process involving the use of Chromated Copper arsenate 
(CCA) for pressure treating wood is not permitted. 

 

2.2 PLYWOOD 

A. Comply with Prod. Std., PS 1. 

B. Bear the mark of a recognized association or independent inspection 
agency that maintains continuing control over quality of plywood which 
identifies compliance by veneer grade, group number, span rating where 
applicable, and glue type. 

C. Sheathing: 

1. APA rated Exposure 1 or Exterior; panel grade CD or better. 

2. Wall sheathing: 

a. Minimum 9 mm (11/32 inch) thick with supports 400 mm (16 inches) 
on center and 12 mm (15/32 inch) thick with supports 600 mm (24 
inches) on center unless specified otherwise. 

b. Minimum 1200 mm (48 inches) wide at corners without corner bracing 
of framing. 

2.3 ROUGH HARDWARE AND ADHESIVES: 

A. Anchor Bolts: 

1. ASME B18.2.1 and ANSI B18.2.2 galvanized, 13 mm (1/2 inch) unless 
shown otherwise. 

2. Extend at least 200 mm (8 inches) into masonry or concrete with ends 
bent 50 mm (2 inches). 

B. Miscellaneous Bolts: Expansion Bolts: C1D, A-A-55615; lag bolt, long 
enough to extend at least 65 mm (2-1/2 inches) into masonry or concrete. 
Use 13 mm (1/2 inch) bolt unless shown otherwise. 

C. Washers 

1. ASTM F844. 

2. Use zinc or cadmium coated steel or cast iron for washers exposed to 
weather. 

D. Screws: 

1. Wood to Wood: ANSI B18.6.1 or ASTM C1002. 

2. Wood to Steel: ASTM C954, or ASTM C1002. 

E. Nails: 

1. Size and type best suited for purpose unless noted otherwise. Use 
aluminum-alloy nails, plated nails, or zinc-coated nails, for nailing 
wood work exposed to weather and on roof blocking. 


2. ASTM F1667: 

a. Common: Type I, Style 10. 

b. Concrete: Type I, Style 11. 

c. Barbed: Type I, Style 26. 

d. Underlayment: Type I, Style 25. 

e. Masonry: Type I, Style 27. 

f. Use special nails designed for use with ties, strap anchors, 
framing connectors, joists hangers, and similar items. Nails not 
less than 32 mm (1-1/4 inches) long, 8d and deformed or annular 
ring shank. 

 

PART 3 – EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION, GENERAL 

A. Where wood-preservative-treated lumber is installed adjacent to metal 
decking or other metals, install continuous flexible flashing separator 
between wood and metal surfaces. 

3.2 INSTALLATION OF FRAMING AND MISCELLANEOUS WOOD MEMBERS: 

A. Conform to applicable requirements of the following: 

1. AFPA WCD-number 1, Manual for House Framing for nailing and framing 
unless specified otherwise. 

2. APA for installation of plywood or structural use panels. 

B. Fasteners: 

1. Nails. 

a. Nail in accordance with the Recommended Nailing Schedule as 
specified in AFPA Manual for House Framing where detailed nailing 
requirements are not specified in nailing schedule. Select nail 
size and nail spacing sufficient to develop adequate strength for 
the connection without splitting the members. 

b. Use special nails with framing connectors. 

c. Use eight penny or larger nails for nailing through 25 mm (1 inch) 
thick lumber and for toe nailing 50 mm (2 inch) thick lumber. 

d. Use 16 penny or larger nails for nailing through 50 mm (2 inch) 
thick lumber. 

2. Bolts: 

a. Fit bolt heads and nuts bearing on wood with washers. 

b. Countersink bolt heads flush with the surface of nailers. 

c. Embed in concrete and solid masonry or use expansion bolts. 
Special bolts or screws designed for anchor to solid masonry or 
concrete in drilled holes may be used. 

d. Use toggle bolts to hollow masonry or sheet metal. 


e. Use bolts to steel over 2.84 mm (0.112 inch, 11 gage) in 
thickness. Secure wood nailers to vertical structural steel 
members with bolts, placed one at ends of nailer and 600 mm (24 
inch) intervals between end bolts. Use clips to beam flanges. 

3. Drill Screws to steel less than 2.84 mm (0.112 inch) thick. 

a. ASTM C1002 for steel less than 0.84 mm (0.033 inch) thick. 

b. ASTM C 954 for steel over 0.84 mm (0.033 inch) thick. 

4. Power actuated drive pins may be used where practical to anchor to 
solid masonry, concrete, or steel. 

5. Do not anchor to wood plugs or nailing blocks in masonry or concrete. 
Use metal plugs, inserts or similar fastening. 

6. Screws to Join Wood: 

a. Where shown or option to nails. 

b. ASTM C1002, sized to provide not less than 25 mm (1 inch) 
penetration into anchorage member. 

c. Spaced same as nails. 

C. Blocking Nailers, and Furring: 

1. Install furring, blocking, nailers, and grounds where shown. 

2. Use longest lengths practicable. 

3. Use fire retardant treated wood blocking where shown at openings and 
where shown or specified. 

4. Layers of Blocking or Plates: 

a. Stagger end joints between upper and lower pieces. 

b. Nail at ends and not over 600 mm (24 inches) between ends. 

c. Stagger nails from side to side of wood member over 125 mm (5 
inches) in width. 

 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 06 16 63 
CEMENTITIOUS SHEATHING 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies cement board sheathing applied to frame wall 
construction, ready to receive subsequent finishes. 

1.2 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Samples: 

1. Cement board panels, 200 mm by 200 mm (8 inches by 8 inches), minimum 
size. 

2. Fasteners, each type used. 

3. Reinforcing tape for joints 300 mm (12 inches) long. 

4. Water barrier backing, 300 mm (12 inches) square. 

C. Product Data: 

1. Cement board sheathing. 

2. Reinforcing tape. 

3. Fasteners. 

1.3 DELIVERY AND STORAGE 

A. Deliver materials in containers with labels legible and intact. 

B. Store materials so as to prevent damage or contamination. 

 

1.4 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to the extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by the basic 
designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

C954-10.................Steel Drill Screws for the Application of Gypsum 
Panel Products or Metal Plaster Bases to Steel 
Studs from 0.033 in. (0.84 mm) to 0.112 in. (2.84 
mm) in Thickness. 

C1325-08................Non-Asbestos Fiber-Mat Reinforced Cementitious 
Backer Units 

D226-09.................Asphalt-Saturated Organic Felt Used in Roofing and 
Waterproofing. 

D4586-07................Asphalt Roof Cement, Asbestos-Free 

C. Federal Specifications (FS): 


UU-B-790................Building Paper, Vegetable Fiber INT AMD 1 (Kraft, 
Waterproofed, Water Repellant and Fire Resistant) 

D. Gypsum Association: 

GA253...................Application of Gypsum Sheathing. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 CEMENT BOARD SHEATHING 

A. Conform to ASTM C1325, except as follows. 

B. Property Minimum Average Value 

1. Flame Spread 5 

2. Smoke Density 0 

3. Thickness 13 mm (1/2 inch) 

4. Minimum Width 800 mm (32 inches) 

 

5. Flexural Strength wet and dry 6895 kpa (1000 psi) 

. Fastener Holding wet and dry 33 kpa (125 pounds) 

2.2 ACCESSORY MATERIALS 

A. Steel Drill Screws: ASTM C954. Modified for flat head. Bugle head not 
acceptable. 

B. Organic Felt: ASTM D226, Type II, 13.6 kg (30 lb). 

C. Roof Cement: ASTM D4586 

D. Joint Reinforcing Tape: 

1. Minimum 100 mm (4-inches) wide open mesh alkali resistant. 

2. Glass fiber mesh polymer coated as recommended by Cement Board 
manufacturer. 

E. Water Barrier: FS UU-B-790. Type I (Barrier paper), Grade D (Water-vapor 
permeable). Other products meeting or exceeding the Federal specification 
for a water barrier with water vapor permeability are acceptable. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 

A. Do not install units when temperature is below 4.5 degrees Celsius (40 
degrees F). 

B. Do not install joint reinforcing tape when temperature is below 10 degrees 
Celsius (50 degrees F). 

 

3.2 INSTALLATION 

A. Remove wrapping and separate to allow air circulation for not less than 
seven days before installation. 

B. Installing Water Barrier over Framing Members: 

1. Apply roof cement or tape to framing members sufficient to adhere and 
support water barrier. 

2. Use either organic felt or water barrier. 


3. Apply barrier shingle fashion with horizontal joints lapped not less 
than 50 mm (2 inches). Lap end joints over framing, not less than 100 
mm (4 inches) cemented together with roof cement, stagger end joints. 

4. Do not leave over 300 mm (12-inch) wide strip exposed when work is 
stopped. 

5. Coordinate with installation of flashing to lap water barrier over 
flashing. Install weeps every 600 mm (24 inches) or as detailed, 
directly above flashing. Provide for clear exit of water to exterior. 

6. Repair torn or cut barrier with barrier patch spanning framing space 
cemented to surface along top and side edges. 

C. Installing Cement Board Units: 

1. Apply cement board sheathing immediately over water barrier in 
accordance with GA-253, with rounded edges and rough side to exterior, 
except as specified otherwise. 

2. Secure units to framing members with screws spaced not more than 200 mm 
(8 inches) on center and not closer than 13 mm (1/2-inch) from the edge 
of the unit. 

3. Install screws so that the screw heads do not penetrate the surface of 
unit. 

4. Install 13 mm (1/2-inch) wide horizontal control joints at floors and 
vertical control joints not over 4.87 m (16 feet) on center unless 
shown otherwise, maintain alignment. 

5. Stop units at edges of building expansion joints. 

6. Minimum bearing over framing members: 19 mm (3/4-inch.) 

 

D. Joint and Surface Treatment: Apply joint reinforcing tape over joints, 
exposed edges, and corners using adhesive recommended by manufacturer. 

E. Leave surface flush and ready to receive subsequent finishes. 

3.3 PROTECTION AND REPAIR 

A. Protect board with temporary coverings against moisture until subsequent 
finish is applied. 

B. Patch and repair damaged surface prior to application of subsequent 
finish. 

1. Fill cracks. 

2. Replace loose, spalling or missing joint finish. 

3. Replace broken or damaged boards. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 06 20 00 
FINISH CARPENTRY 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies exterior and interior millwork. 

B. Items specified. 

Breakroom Cabinets 

Reception Desk 

Nurses’ and Doctors’Stations 

Counter Shelf 

Sink Bases 

Counter or Work Tops 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Fabricated Metal brackets, bench supports and countertop legs: Section 
05 50 00, METAL FABRICATIONS. 

B. Framing, furring and blocking: Section 06 10 00, ROUGH CARPENTRY. 

C. Wood doors: Section 08 14 00, WOOD DOORS. 

D. Other Countertops: Division 11, EQUIPMENT and Division 12, FURNISHINGS. 

E. Electrical light fixtures and duplex outlets: Division 26, ELECTRICAL. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings: 

1. Millwork items – Half full size scale for sections and details 1:50 
(1/4-inch) for elevations and plans. 

2. Show construction and installation. 

C. Samples: 

 Plastic laminate finished plywood or particleboard, 150 mm by 300 mm 
(six by twelve inches). 

D. Certificates: 

1. Indicating moisture content of materials meet the requirements 
specified. 

E. List of acceptable sealers for fire retardant and preservative treated 
materials. 

F. Manufacturer's literature and data: 

1. Finish hardware 

2. Sinks with fittings 

3. Electrical components 


1.4 DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 

A. Protect lumber and millwork from dampness, maintaining moisture content 
specified both during and after delivery at site. 

B. Store finishing lumber and millwork in weathertight well ventilated 
structures or in space in existing buildings designated by Resident 
Engineer. Store at a minimum temperature of 210C (700F) for not less 
than 10 days before installation. 

C. Pile lumber in stacks in such manner as to provide air circulation 
around surfaces of each piece. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A36/A36M-08.............Structural Steel 

A53-12..................Pipe, Steel, Black and Hot-Dipped Zinc Coated, 
Welded and Seamless 

A167-99 (R2009).........Stainless and Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel 
Steel Plate, Sheet, and Strip 

B26/B26M-09.............Aluminum-Alloy Sand Castings 

B221-08.................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, 
Wire, Profiles, and Tubes 

E84-10..................Surface Burning Characteristics of Building 
Materials 

C. American Hardboard Association (AHA): 

A135.4-04...............Basic Hardboard 

D. Builders Hardware Manufacturers Association (BHMA): 

A156.9-03...............Cabinet Hardware 

A156.11-10..............Cabinet Locks 

A156.16-08..............Auxiliary Hardware 

E. Hardwood Plywood and Veneer Association (HPVA): 

HP1-09..................Hardwood and Decorative Plywood 

F. National Particleboard Association (NPA): 

A208.1-09...............Wood Particleboard 

G. American Wood-Preservers’ Association (AWPA): 

AWPA C1-03..............All Timber Products – Preservative Treatment by 
Pressure Processes 

H. Architectural Woodwork Institute (AWI): 

AWI-09..................Architectural Woodwork Quality Standards and 
Quality Certification Program 

I. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA): 


LD 3-05.................High-Pressure Decorative Laminates 

J. U.S. Department of Commerce, Product Standard (PS): 

PS20-10.................American Softwood Lumber Standard 

K. Military Specification (Mil. Spec): 

MIL-L-19140E............Lumber and Plywood, Fire-Retardant Treated 

L. Federal Specifications (Fed. Spec.): 

A-A-1922A...............Shield Expansion 

A-A-1936................Contact Adhesive 

FF-N-836D...............Nut, Square, Hexagon Cap, Slotted, Castle 

FF-S-111D(1)............Screw, Wood 

MM-L-736(C).............Lumber, Hardwood 

PART 2 – PRODUCTS 

2.1 LUMBER 

A. Grading and Marking: 

1. Lumber shall bear the grade mark, stamp, or other identifying marks 
indicating grades of material. 

2. Such identifying marks on a material shall be in accordance with the 
rule or standard under which the material is produced, including 
requirements for qualifications and authority of the inspection 
organization, usage of authorized identification, and information 
included in the identification. 

3. The inspection agency for lumber shall be approved by the Board of 
Review, American Lumber Standards Committee, to grade species used. 

B. Sizes: 

1. Lumber Size references, unless otherwise specified, are nominal 
sizes, and actual sizes shall be within manufacturing tolerances 
allowed by the standard under which product is produced. 

2. Millwork, standing and running trim, and rails: Actual size as shown 
or specified. 

C. Hardwood: MM-L-736, species as specified for each item. 

D. Softwood: PS-20, exposed to view appearance grades: 

1. Use C select or D select, vertical grain for transparent finish 
including stain transparent finish. 

2. Use Prime for painted or opaque finish. 

E. Use edge grain Wood members exposed to weather. 

2.2 PLYWOOD 

A. Softwood Plywood: 

1. Prod. Std. 

2. Grading and Marking: 


a. Each sheet of plywood shall bear the mark of a recognized 
association or independent inspection agency that maintains 
continuing control over the quality of the plywood. 

b. The mark shall identify the plywood by species group or 
identification index, and shall show glue type, grade, and 
compliance with PS1. 

3. Plywood, 13 mm (1/2 inch) and thicker; not less than five ply 
construction, except 32 mm (1-1/4 inch) thick plywood not less than 
seven ply. 

4. Plastic Laminate Plywood Cores: 

a. Exterior Type, and species group. 

b. Veneer Grade: A-C. 

5. Shelving Plywood: 

a. Interior Type, any species group. 

b. Veneer Grade: A-B or B-C. 

6. Other: As specified for item. 

2.3 PARTICLEBOARD 

A. NPA A208.1 

B. Plastic Laminate Particleboard Cores: 

1. Use Type 1, Grade 1-M-3, or Type 2, Grade 2-M-2, unless otherwise 
specified. 

2. Use Type 2, Grade 2-M-2, exterior bond, for tops with sinks. 

C. General Use: Type 1, Grade 1-M-3 or Type 2, Grade 2-M-2. 

2.4 PLASTIC LAMINATE 

A. NEMA LD-3. 

B. Exposed decorative surfaces including countertops, both sides of cabinet 
doors, and for items having plastic laminate finish. General Purpose, 
Type HGL. 

C. Cabinet Interiors including Shelving: Both of following options to 
comply with NEMA, CLS as a minimum. 

1. Plastic laminate clad plywood or particle board. 

2. Resin impregnated decorative paper thermally fused to particle board. 

D. Backing sheet on bottom of plastic laminate covered wood tops: Backer, 
Type HGP. 

E. Post Forming Fabrication, Decorative Surfaces: Post forming, Type HGP. 

2.5 ADHESIVE 

A. For Plastic Laminate: Fed. Spec. A-A-1936. 

B. For Interior Millwork: Unextended urea resin, unextended melamine resin, 
phenol resin, or resorcinol resin. 

C. For Exterior Millwork: Unextended melamine resin, phenol resin, or 
resorcinol resin. 


2.6 STAINLESS STEEL 

ASTM A167, Type 302 or 304. 

2.7 HARDWARE 

A. Rough Hardware: 

1. Furnish rough hardware with a standard plating, applied after 
punching, forming and assembly of parts; galvanized, cadmium plated, 
or zinc-coated by electric-galvanizing process. Galvanized where 
specified. 

2. Use galvanized coating on ferrous metal for exterior work unless nonferrous 
metals or stainless is used. 

3. Fasteners: 

a. Bolts with Nuts: FF-N-836. 

b. Expansion Bolts: A-A-1922A. 

c. Screws: Fed. Spec. FF-S-111. 

 

B. Finish Hardware 

1. Cabinet Hardware: ANSI A156.9. 

a. Door/Drawer Pulls: B02011. Door in seismic zones: B03182. 

b. Drawer Slides: B05051 for drawers over 150 mm (6 inches) deep, 
B05052 for drawers 75 mm to 150 mm 3 to 6 inches) deep, and B05053 
for drawers less than 75 mm (3 inches) deep. 

c. Adjustable Shelf Standards: B4061 with shelf rest B04083. 

d. Concealed Hinges: B1601, minimum 110 degree opening. 

e. Butt Hinges: B01361, for flush doors, B01381 for inset lipped 
doors, and B01521 for overlay doors. 

f. Cabinet Door Catch: B0371 or B03172. 

g. Vertical Slotted Shelf Standard: B04103 with shelf brackets 
B04113, sized for shelf depth. 

2. Cabinet Locks: ANSI A156.11. 

a. Drawers and Hinged Door: E07262. 

3. Auxiliary Hardware: ANSI A156.16. 

a. Shelf Bracket: B04041, japanned or enameled finish. 

b. Handrail Brackets: L03081 or L03101. 

1) Cast Aluminum, satin polished finish. 

2) Cast Malleable Iron, japanned or enamel finish. 

4. Steel Channel Frame and Leg supports for Counter top. Fabricated 
under Section 05 50 00, METAL FABRICATIONS. 

5. Thru-Wall Counter Brackets: 

a. Steel angles drilled for fasteners on 100 mm (4 inches) centers. 

b. Baked enamel prime coat finish. 

6. Edge Strips Moldings: 


a. Driven type "T" shape with serrated retaining stem; vinyl plastic 
to match plastic laminate color, stainless steel, or 3 mm (1/8 
inch) thick extruded aluminum. 

b. Stainless steel or extruded aluminum channels. 

c. Stainless steel, number 4 finish; aluminum, mechanical applied 
medium satin finish, clear anodized 0.1 mm (0.4 mils) thick. 

7. Rubber or Vinyl molding 

a. Rubber or vinyl standard stock and in longest lengths practicable. 

b. Design for closures at joints with walls and adhesive anchorage. 

c. Adhesive as recommended by molding manufacturer. 

8. Primers: Manufacturer's standard primer for steel providing baked 
enamel finish. 

2.8 MOISTURE CONTENT 

A. Moisture content of lumber and millwork at time of delivery to site. 

1. Interior finish lumber, trim, and millwork 32 mm (1-1/4 inches) or 
less in nominal thickness: 12 percent on 85 percent of the pieces and 
15 percent on the remainder. 

2. Exterior treated or untreated finish lumber and trim 100 mm (4 
inches) or less in nominal thickness: 15 percent. 

3. Moisture content of other materials shall be in accordance with the 
standards under which the products are produced. 

2.9 FABRICATION 

A. General: 

1. Except as otherwise specified, use AWI Custom Grade for architectural 
woodwork and interior millwork. 

2. Finish woodwork shall be free from pitch pockets. 

3. Except where special profiles are shown, trim shall be standard stock 
molding and members of the same species. 

4. Plywood shall be not less than 13 mm (1/2 inch), unless otherwise 
shown or specified. 

5. Edges of members in contact with concrete or masonry shall have a 
square corner caulking rebate. 

6. Fabricate members less than 4 m (14 feet) in length from one piece of 
lumber, back channeled and molded a shown. 

7. Interior trim and items of millwork to be painted may be fabricated 
from jointed, built-up, or laminated members, unless otherwise shown 
on drawings or specified. 

8. Plastic Laminate Work: 

a. Factory glued to either a plywood or a particle board core, 
thickness as shown or specified. 


b. Cover exposed edges with plastic laminate, except where aluminum, 
stainless steel, or plastic molded edge strips are shown or 
specified. Use plastic molded edge strips on 19 mm (3/4-inch) 
molded thick or thinner core material. 

c. Provide plastic backing sheet on underside of countertops, vanity 
tops, thru-wall counter and sills including back splashes and end 
splashes of countertops. 

d. Use backing sheet on concealed large panel surface when decorative 
face does not occur. 

E. Breakroom Counters, Reception Desk, Nurses and Doctors Station, Sink 
Bases: 

1. Fabricate to AWI premium grade construction in conformance with AWI 
Section 400, CASEWORK. 

2. Use softwood for structural framing member's standard sizes, space 
not over 400 mm (16 inches) on center. 

3. Use red oak for exposed hardwood trim and edging. 

4. Use drawer guides on drawers with pulls. 

5. Use pulls and concealed hinges on doors. 

6. Use adjustable shelf standards with shelf rests. 

7. Use decorative plastic laminate on exposed surfaces including 
interior of cupboard cabinet. 

8. Overlay frame of apron with drawer and door face. 

9. Provide cut outs for electrical devices and outlets. 

H. Thru-Wall Counter or Pass Thru Counter. 

1. Fabricate counter as shown. Return hardwood edge to metal frame at 
ends. Fabricate to join other counters where shown. 

2. Cut to fit metal frame profile. 

3. Fabricate to receive sliding pass window track when shown; specified 
in Section 08 56 19, PASS WINDOWS. 

4. Use angle and fabricated shelf bracket supports. 

I. Receiving shelf in Agent Cashier: 

1. Fabricate shelf as shown over 19 mm (3/4 inch) thick core. 

2. Use B04041 shelf bracket. 

J. Counter or Work Tops: 

1. Fabrication with plastic laminate over 32 mm (1-1/4 inch) thick core 
unless shown otherwise. 

a. Use decorative laminate for exposed edges of tops 38 mm (1-1/2 
inches) wide and on back splash and end splash. Use plastic or 
metal edges for top edges less than 38 mm (1-1/2 inches) wide. 

b. Assemble back splash and end splash to counter top. 

c. Use one piece counters for straight runs. 


d. Miter corners for field joints with overlapping blocking on 
underside of joint. 

2. Fabricate wood counter for work benches as shown. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 

A. Maintain work areas and storage areas to a minimum temperature of 210C 
(700F) for not less than 10 days before and during installation of 
interior millwork. 

B. Do not install finish lumber or millwork in any room or space where wet 
process systems such as concrete, masonry, or plaster work is not 
complete and dry. 

3.2 INSTALLATION 

A. General: 

1. Millwork receiving transparent finish shall be primed and backpainted 
on concealed surfaces. Set no millwork until primed and backpainted. 


2. Secure trim with fine finishing nails, screws, or glue as required. 

3. Set nails for putty stopping. Use washers under bolt heads where no 
other bearing plate occurs. 

4. Seal cut edges of preservative and fire retardant treated wood 
materials with a certified acceptable sealer. 

5. Coordinate with plumbing and electrical work for installation of 
fixtures and service connections in millwork items. 

6. Plumb and level items unless shown otherwise. 

7. Nail finish at each blocking, lookout, or other nailer and 
intermediate points; toggle or expansion bolt in place where nails 
are not suitable. 

8. Exterior Work: Joints shall be close fitted, metered, tongue and 
grooved, rebated, or lapped to exclude water and made up in thick 
white lead paste in oil. 

B. Breakroom Cabinets, Reception Desk, Nurses and Doctors Station, Sink 
Bases: 

1. Secure framing to floor with expansion bolts. 

2. Secure counter top to support with wood cleats or metal angles 
screwed on 150 mm (6 inch) centers. 

3. Conceal fasteners on corridor side. Exposed fasteners permitted under 
counter top and in knee spaces on staff side. 

C. Shelves: 

1. Install mounting strip at back wall and end wall for shelves in 
closets where shown secured with toggle bolts at each end and not 
over 600 mm (24 inch) centers between ends. 


a. Nail Shelf to mounting strip at ends and to back wall strip at not 
over 900 mm (36 inches) on center. 

b. Install metal bracket, ANSI A156.16, B04041, not over 1200 mm (4 
feet) centers when shelves exceed 1800 mm (6 feet) in length. 

c. Install metal bracket, ANSI A156.16, B04051, not over 1200 mm (4 
feet) on centers where shelf length exceeds 1800 mm (6 feet) in 
length with metal rods, clothes hanger bars ANSI A156.16, L03131, 
of required length, full length of shelf. 

2. Install vertical slotted shelf standards, ANSI A156.9, B04103 to 
studs with toggle bolts through each fastener opening. Double slotted 
shelf standards may be used where adjacent shelves terminate. 

a. Install brackets ANSI A156.9, B04113, providing supports for shelf 
not over 900 mm (36 inches) on center and within 13 mm (1/2 inch) 
of shelf end unless shown otherwise. 

b. Install shelves on brackets so front edge is restrained by 
bracket. 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 07 81 00 
APPLIED FIREPROOFING 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies mineral fiber and cementitious coverings to 
provide fire resistance to interior structural steel members. 

 Any demolition or damage to existing fireproofing or any displaced or 
missing fireproofing that has been found once the ceilings are removed 
is to be replaced and/or repaired with new fire proofing to meet 
current required fire ratings. 

1.2 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Manufacturer's complete and detailed application instructions and 
specifications. 

2. Manufacturer's repair and patching instructions. 

C. Certificates: 

1. Certificate from testing laboratory attesting fireproofing material 
and application method meet the specified fire ratings. 

a. List thickness and density of material required to meet fire 
ratings. 

b. Accompanied by complete test report and test record. 

2. Manufacturer's certificate indicating sprayed-on fireproofing 
material supplied under the Contract is same within manufacturing 
tolerance as fireproofing material tested. 

D. Miscellaneous: 

1. Manufacturer's written approval of surfaces to receive sprayed-on 
fireproofing. 

2. Manufacturer's written approval of completed installation. 

3. Manufacturer's written approval of the applicators of fireproofing 
material. 

1.3 PRODUCT DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 

A. Deliver to job-site in sealed containers marked and labeled to show 
manufacturer's name and brand and certification of compliance with the 
specified requirements. 

B. Remove damaged containers from the site. 


C. Store the materials off the ground, under cover, away from damp 
surfaces. 

D. Keep dry until ready for use. 

E. Remove materials that have been exposed to water before installation 
from the site. 

1.4 QUALITY CONTROL 

A. Test for fire endurance in accordance with ASTM E119, for fire rating 
specified, in a nationally recognized laboratory. 

B. Manufacturer's inspection and approval of surfaces to receive 
fireproofing as specified under paragraph Examination. 

C. Manufacturer's approval of fireproofing applications. 

D. Manufacturer's approval of completed installation. 

E. Manufacturer's representative shall observe and advise at the 
commencement of application, and shall visit the site as required 
thereafter for the purpose of ascertaining proper application. 

F. Pre-Application Test Area. 

1. Apply a test area consisting of a typical overhead fireproofing 
installation, including not less than 4.5 m (15 feet)* of beam and 
deck. 

a. Apply to one column. 

b. Apply for the hourly ratings used. 

2. Install in location selected by the Contracting Officer 
Representative (COR), for approval by the representative of the 
fireproofing material manufacturer and by the Government. 

3. Perform Bond test on painted steel in accordance with ASTM E736. 

4. Do not proceed in other areas until installation of test area has 
been completed and approved. 

5. Keep approved installation area open for observation as criteria for 
sprayed-on fireproofing. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by the basic 
designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

C841-03(R2008)..........Installation of Interior Lathing and Furring 

C847-10.................Metal Lath 

E84-10..................Surface Burning Characteristics of Building 
Materials 


E119-10.................Fire Tests of Building Construction and 
Materials 

E605-93(R2006)..........Thickness and Density of Sprayed Fire-Resistive 
Materials Applied to Structural Members 

E736-00(R2006)..........Cohesion/Adhesion of Sprayed Fire-Resistive 
Materials Applied to Structural Members 

E759-92(R2005)..........The Effect of Deflection on Sprayed Fire- 
Resistive Material Applied to Structural 
Members 

E760-92(R2005)..........Impact on Bonding of Sprayed Fire-Resistive 
Material Applied to Structural Members 

E761-92(R2005)..........Compressive Strength of Fire-Resistive Material 
Applied to Structural Members 

E859-93(R2006)..........Air Erosion of Sprayed Fire-Resistive Materials 
Applied to Structural Members 

E937-93(R2005)..........Corrosion of Steel by Sprayed Fire-Resistive 
Material Applied to Structural Members 

E1042-02(R2008).........Acoustically, Absorptive Materials Applied by 
Trowel or Spray. 

G21-09..................Determining Resistance of Synthetic Polymeric 
Materials to Fungi 

C. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

Fire Resistance Directory...Latest Edition including Supplements 

D. Warnock Hersey (WH): 

Certification Listings..Latest Edition 

E. Factory Mutual System (FM): 

Approval Guide..........Latest Edition including Supplements 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 SPRAYED-ON FIREPROOFING 

A. ASTM E1042, Class (a), Category A. 

1. Type I, factory mixed cementitious materials with approved 
aggregate. 

2. Type II, factory mixed mineral fiber with integral inorganic binders 
minimum 240 kg/m3 (15 1b/ft3) density per ASTM E605 test unless 
specified otherwise. Use in areas that are completely encased. 

B. Materials containing asbestos are not permitted. 

C. Fireproofing characteristics when applied in the thickness and density 
required to achieve the fire-rating specified. 


 

Characteristic 

Test 

Results 

1. 

Deflection 

ASTM E759 

No cracking, spalling, or 
delamination when backing to 
which it is applied has a 
deflection up to 1/120 in 3m (10 
ft.) 

2. 

Corrosion-Resistance 

ASTM E937 

No promotion of corrosion of 
steel. 

3. 

Bond Impact 

ASTM E760 

No cracking, spalling, or 
delamination. 

4. 

Cohesion/Adhesion 

(Bond Strength) 

ASTM E736 

Minimum cohesive/adhesive 
strength of 9.57 kPa (200 
lbf/ft2) for protected areas. 
19.15 kPa (400 lbf/ft2) for 
exposed areas. 

5. 

Air Erosion 

ASTM E859 

Maximum gain weight of the 
collecting filter 0.27gm/m2 
(0.025 gm/ft2). 

6. 

Compressive Strength 

ASTM E761 

Minimum compressive strength 48 
kPa (1000psf). 

7. 

Surface Burning 
Characteristics with 
adhesive and sealer 
to be used 

ASTM E84 

Flame spread 25 or less smoke 
developed 50 or less 

8. 

Fungi Resistance 

ASTM G21 

Resistance to mold growth when 
inoculated with aspergillus niger 
(28 days for general application) 



 

2.2 ADHESIVE 

A. Bonding adhesive for Type II (fibrous) materials as recommended and 
supplied by the fireproofing material manufacturer. 

B. Adhesive may be an integral part of the material or applied separately 
to surface receiving fireproofing material. 

2.3 SEALER 

A. Sealer for Type II (fibrous) material as recommended and supplied by 
the fireproofing material manufacturer. 

B. Surface burning characteristics as specified for fireproofing material. 

C. Fungus resistant. 

D. Sealer may be an integral part of the material or applied separately to 
the exposed surface. When applied separately use contrasting color 
pigmented sealer, white preferred. 

2.4 WATER 

A. Clean, fresh, and free from organic and mineral impurities. 


B. pH of 6.9 to 7.1. 

2.5 MECHANICAL BOND MATERIAL 

A. Expanded Metal Lath: ASTM C847, minimum weight of 0.92 kg/m2 (1.7 pounds 
per square yard). 

B. Fasteners: ASTM C841. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 EXAMINATION 

A. Verify surfaces to receive fireproofing are clean and free of dust, 
soot, oil, grease, water soluble materials or any foreign substance 
which would prevent adhesion of the fireproofing material. 

B. Verify hangers, inserts and clips are installed before the application 
of fireproofing material. 

C. Verify ductwork, piping, and other obstructing material and equipment 
is not installed that will interfere with fireproofing installation. 

D. Verify concrete work on steel decking and concrete encased steel is 
completed. 

E. Verify temperature and enclosure conditions are required by fireproofing 
material manufacturer. 

3.2 APPLICATION 

A. Do not start application until written approval has been obtained from 
manufacturer of fireproofing materials that surfaces have been 
inspected by the manufacturer or his representative, and are suitable 
to receive sprayed-on fireproofing. 

B. Coordinate application of fireproofing material with other trades. 

C. Application of Metal Lath: 

1. Apply to beam and columns having painted surfaces which fail ASTM 
E736 Bond Test requirements in pre-application test area. 

2. Apply to beam flanges 300 mm (12-inches) or more in width. 

3. Apply to column flanges 400 mm (16-inches) or more in width. 

4. Apply to beam or column web 400 mm (16-inches) or more in depth. 

5. Tack weld or mechanically fasten on maximum of 300 mm (12-inch) 
center. 

6. Lap and tie lath member in accordance with ASTM C841. 

D. Mix and apply in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 

1. Mechanically control material and water ratios. 

2. Apply adhesive and sealer, when not an integral part of the 
materials, in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 


3. Apply to density and thickness indicated in UL Fire Resistance 
Directory, FM Approval Guide, or WH Certification Listings unless 
specified otherwise. Test in accordance with ASTM E119. 

4. Minimum applied dry density per cubic meter (cubic foot) for the 
underside of the walk on deck (interstitial) hung purl in or beam 
and steel deck, columns in interstitial spaces and mechanical 
equipment rooms shall be as follows: 

a. Type I - 240 kg/m3 (15 lb/ft3). 

b. Type II - 350 kg/m3 (22 lb/ft3). 

c. Materials with higher density of 640kg/m3 (40pcf) maybe used in some 
mechanical rooms or parking garages.E. Application shall be 
completed in one area, inspected and approved by Contracting Officer 
Representative (COR) before removal of application equipment and 
proceeding with further work. 

3.3 FIELD TESTS 

A. Tests of applied material will be performed by VA retained Testing 
Laboratory. See Section 01 45 29, TESTING LABORATORY SERVICES. 

B. Contracting Officer Representative (COR) will select area to be tested 
in specific bays on each floor using a geometric grid pattern. 

C. Test for thickness and density in accordance with ASTM E605. Areas 
showing thickness less than that required as a result of fire endurance 
test will be rejected. 

D. Areas showing less than required fireproofing characteristics will be 
rejected on the following field tests. 

1. Test for cohesion/adhesion: ASTM E736. 

2. Test for bond impact strength: ASTM E760. 

3.3 PATCHING AND REPAIRING 

A. Inspect after mechanical, electrical and other trades have completed 
work in contact with fireproofing material, but before sprayed material 
is covered by subsequent construction. 

B. Perform corrective measures in accordance with fireproofing material 
Manufacturer's recommendations. 

1. Respray areas requiring additional fireproofing material to provide 
the required thickness, and replace dislodged or removed material. 

2. Spray material for patching by machine directly on point to be 
patched, or into a container and then hand apply. 

3. Hand mixing of material is not permitted. 

C. Repair: 


1. Respray all test and rejected areas. 

2. Patch fireproofing material which is removed or disturbed after 
approval. 

D. Perform final inspection of sprayed areas after patching and repair. 

3.5 SCHEDULE 

A. Apply fireproofing material in interior structural steel members and on 
underside of interior steel floor and roof decks, except on following 
surfaces: 

1. Areas used as air handling plenums. 

2. Steel to be encased in concrete or designated to receive other type 
of fireproofing. 

3. This does not exempt these surfaces from the required fire 
protection. 

B. Type I: 

1. One hour fire rating. 

2. Two hour fire rating. 

3. Three hour fire rating. 

C. Type II: 

1. One hour fire rating. 

2. Two hour fire rating. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 07 84 00 
FIRESTOPPING 

PART 1 GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Closures of openings in walls, floors, and roof decks against 
penetration of flame, heat, and smoke or gases in fire resistant rated 
construction. 

B. Closure of openings in walls against penetration of gases or smoke in 
smoke partitions. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Sealants and application: Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

B. Fire and smoke damper assemblies in ductwork: Section 23 31 00, HVAC 
DUCTS AND CASINGS, Section 23 37 00, AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturers literature, data, and installation instructions for types 
of firestopping and smoke stopping used. 

C. List of FM, UL, or WH classification number of systems installed. 

D. Certified laboratory test reports for ASTM E814 tests for systems not 
listed by FM, UL, or WH proposed for use. 

1.4 DELIVERY AND STORAGE 

A. Deliver materials in their original unopened containers with 
manufacturer’s name and product identification. 

B. Store in a location providing protection from damage and exposure to 
the elements. 

1.5 WARRANTY 

 Firestopping work subject to the terms of the Article “Warranty of 
Construction”, FAR clause 52.246-21, except extend the warranty period 
to five years. 

1.6 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

 FM, UL, or WH or other approved laboratory tested products will be 
acceptable. 

1.7 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by the basic 
designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 


E84-10..................Surface Burning Characteristics of Building 
Materials 

E814-11.................Fire Tests of Through-Penetration Fire Stops 

C. Factory Mutual Engineering and Research Corporation (FM): 

 Annual Issue Approval Guide Building Materials 

D. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

 Annual Issue Building Materials Directory 

 Annual Issue Fire Resistance Directory 

1479-10.................Fire Tests of Through-Penetration Firestops 

E. Warnock Hersey (WH): 

 Annual Issue Certification Listings 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 FIRESTOP SYSTEMS 

A. Use either factory built (Firestop Devices) or field erected (through- 
Penetration Firestop Systems) to form a specific building system 
maintaining required integrity of the fire barrier and stop the passage 
of gases or smoke. 

B. Through-penetration firestop systems and firestop devices tested in 
accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479 using the "F" or "T" rating to 
maintain the same rating and integrity as the fire barrier being 
sealed. "T" ratings are not required for penetrations smaller than or 
equal to 100 mm (4 in) nominal pipe or 0.01 m2 (16 sq. in.) in overall 
cross sectional area. 

C. Products requiring heat activation to seal an opening by its 
intumescence shall exhibit a demonstrated ability to function as 
designed to maintain the fire barrier. 

D. Firestop sealants used for firestopping or smoke sealing shall have 
following properties: 

1. Contain no flammable or toxic solvents. 

2. Have no dangerous or flammable out gassing during the drying or 
curing of products. 

3. Water-resistant after drying or curing and unaffected by high 
humidity, condensation or transient water exposure. 

4. When used in exposed areas, shall be capable of being sanded and 
finished with similar surface treatments as used on the surrounding 
wall or floor surface. 


E. Firestopping system or devices used for penetrations by glass pipe, 
plastic pipe or conduits, unenclosed cables, or other non-metallic 
materials shall have following properties: 

1. Classified for use with the particular type of penetrating material 
used. 

2. Penetrations containing loose electrical cables, computer data 
cables, and communications cables protected using firestopping 
systems that allow unrestricted cable changes without damage to the 
seal. 

3. Intumescent products which would expand to seal the opening and act 
as fire, smoke, toxic fumes, and, water sealant. 

F. Maximum flame spread of 25 and smoke development of 50 when tested in 
accordance with ASTM E84. 

G. FM, UL, or WH rated or tested by an approved laboratory in accordance 
with ASTM E814. 

H. Materials to be asbestos free. 

2.2 SMOKE STOPPING IN SMOKE PARTITIONS 

A. Use silicone sealant in smoke partitions as specified in Section 07 92 
00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

B. Use mineral fiber filler and bond breaker behind sealant. 

C. Sealants shall have a maximum flame spread of 25 and smoke developed of 
50 when tested in accordance with E84. 

D. When used in exposed areas capable of being sanded and finished with 
similar surface treatments as used on the surrounding wall or floor 
surface. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 EXAMINATION 

 Submit product data and installation instructions, as required by 
article, submittals, after an on site examination of areas to receive 
firestopping. 

3.2 PREPARATION 

A. Remove dirt, grease, oil, loose materials, or other substances that 
prevent adherence and bonding or application of the firestopping or 
smoke stopping materials. 

B. Remove insulation on insulated pipe for a distance of 150 mm (six 
inches) on either side of the fire rated assembly prior to applying the 
firestopping materials unless the firestopping materials are tested and 
approved for use on insulated pipes. 


3.3 INSTALLATION 

A. Do not begin work until the specified material data and installation 
instructions of the proposed firestopping systems have been submitted 
and approved. 

B. Install firestopping systems with smoke stopping in accordance with FM, 
UL, WH, or other approved system details and installation instructions. 

C. Install smoke stopping seals in smoke partitions. 

3.4 CLEAN-UP AND ACCEPTANCE OF WORK 

A. As work on each floor is completed, remove materials, litter, and 
debris. 

B. Do not move materials and equipment to the next-scheduled work area 
until completed work is inspected and accepted by the Resident 
Engineer. 

C. Clean up spills of liquid type materials. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 07 92 00 
JOINT SEALANTS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION: 

 Section covers all sealant and caulking materials and their 
application, wherever required for complete installation of building 
materials or systems. 

1.2 RELATED WORK: 

A. Masonry control and expansion joint: Section 04 20 00, UNIT MASONRY. 

B. Firestopping penetrations: Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

C. Glazing: Section 08 80 00, GLAZING. 

D. Sound rated gypsum partitions/sound sealants: Section 09 29 00, GYPSUM 
BOARD. 

E. Mechanical Work: Section 21 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR FIRE 
SUPPRESSION,and Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING 
Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC AND STEAM GENERATION. 

1.3 QUALITY CONTROL: 

A. Installer Qualifications: An experienced installer who has specialized 
in installing joint sealants similar in material, design, and extent to 
those indicated for this Project and whose work has resulted in jointsealant 
installations with a record of successful in-service 
performance. 

B. Source Limitations: Obtain each type of joint sealant through one 
source from a single manufacturer. 

C. Product Testing: Obtain test results from a qualified testing agency 
based on testing current sealant formulations within a 12-month period. 

1. Testing Agency Qualifications: An independent testing agency 
qualified according to ASTM C1021. 

2. Test elastomeric joint sealants for compliance with requirements 
specified by reference to ASTM C920, and where applicable, to other 
standard test methods. 

3. Test elastomeric joint sealants according to SWRI’s Sealant 
Validation Program for compliance with requirements specified by 
reference to ASTM C920 for adhesion and cohesion under cyclic 
movement, adhesion-in peel, and indentation hardness. 

4. Test other joint sealants for compliance with requirements indicated 
by referencing standard specifications and test methods. 


D. Preconstruction Field-Adhesion Testing: Before installing elastomeric 
sealants, field test their adhesion to joint substrates in accordance 
with sealant manufacturer’s recommendations: 

1. Locate test joints where indicated or, if not indicated, as directed 
by Contracting Officer. 

2. Conduct field tests for each application indicated below: 

a. Each type of elastomeric sealant and joint substrate indicated. 

b. Each type of non-elastomeric sealant and joint substrate 
indicated. 

3. Notify Contracting Officer Representative (COR) seven days in 
advance of dates and times when test joints will be erected. 

4. Arrange for tests to take place with joint sealant manufacturer’s 
technical representative present. 

E. VOC: Acrylic latex and Silicon sealants shall have less than 50g/l VOC 
content. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS: 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's installation instructions for each product used. 

C. Cured samples of exposed sealants for each color where required to 
match adjacent material. 

D. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Caulking compound 

2. Primers 

3. Sealing compound, each type, including compatibility when different 
sealants are in contact with each other. 

1.5 PROJECT CONDITIONS: 

A. Environmental Limitations: 

1. Do not proceed with installation of joint sealants under following 
conditions: 

a. When ambient and substrate temperature conditions are outside 
limits permitted by joint sealant manufacturer or are below 4.4 .C 
(40 .F). 

b. When joint substrates are wet. 

B. Joint-Width Conditions: 

1. Do not proceed with installation of joint sealants where joint 
widths are less than those allowed by joint sealant manufacturer for 
applications indicated. 


C. Joint-Substrate Conditions: 

1. Do not proceed with installation of joint sealants until 
contaminants capable of interfering with adhesion are removed from 
joint substrates. 

1.6 DELIVERY, HANDLING, AND STORAGE: 

A. Deliver materials in manufacturers' original unopened containers, with 
brand names, date of manufacture, shelf life, and material designation 
clearly marked thereon. 

B. Carefully handle and store to prevent inclusion of foreign materials. 

C. Do not subject to sustained temperatures exceeding 32. C (90. F) or less 
than 5. C (40. F). 

1.7 DEFINITIONS: 

A. Definitions of terms in accordance with ASTM C717 and as specified. 

B. Back-up Rod: A type of sealant backing. 

C. Bond Breakers: A type of sealant backing. 

D. Filler: A sealant backing used behind a back-up rod. 

1.8 WARRANTY: 

A. Warranty exterior sealing against leaks, adhesion, and cohesive 
failure, and subject to terms of "Warranty of Construction", FAR clause 
52.246-21, except that warranty period shall be extended to two years. 

B. General Warranty: Special warranty specified in this Article shall not 
deprive Government of other rights Government may have under other 
provisions of Contract Documents and shall be in addition to, and run 
concurrent with, other warranties made by Contractor under requirements 
of Contract Documents. 

1.9 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS: 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in text by basic designation 
only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

C509-06.................Elastomeric Cellular Preformed Gasket and 
Sealing Material. 

C612-10.................Mineral Fiber Block and Board Thermal 
Insulation. 

C717-10.................Standard Terminology of Building Seals and 
Sealants. 

C834-10.................Latex Sealants. 

C919-08.................Use of Sealants in Acoustical Applications. 


C920-10.................Elastomeric Joint Sealants. 

C1021-08................Laboratories Engaged in Testing of Building 
Sealants. 

C1193-09................Standard Guide for Use of Joint Sealants. 

C1330-02 (R2007)........Cylindrical Sealant Backing for Use with Cold 
Liquid Applied Sealants. 

D1056-07................Specification for Flexible Cellular Materials— 
Sponge or Expanded Rubber. 

E84-09..................Surface Burning Characteristics of Building 
Materials. 

C. Sealant, Waterproofing and Restoration Institute (SWRI). 

 The Professionals’ Guide 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 SEALANTS: 

A. S-1: 

1. ASTM C920, polyurethane or polysulfide. 

2. Type M. 

3. Class 25. 

4. Grade NS. 

5. Shore A hardness of 20-40 

B. S-2: 

1. ASTM C920, polyurethane or polysulfide. 

2. Type M. 

3. Class 25. 

4. Grade P. 

5. Shore A hardness of 25-40. 

C. S-4: 

1. ASTM C920 polyurethane or polysulfide. 

2. Type S. 

3. Class 25. 

4. Grade NS. 

5. Shore A hardness of 25-40. 

D. S-6: 

1. ASTM C920, silicone, neutral cure. 

2. Type S. 

3. Class: Joint movement range of plus 100 percent to minus 50 percent. 

4. Grade NS. 

5. Shore A hardness of 15-20. 


6. Minimum elongation of 1200 percent. 

E. S-9: 

1. ASTM C920 silicone. 

2. Type S. 

3. Class 25. 

4. Grade NS. 

5. Shore A hardness of 25-30. 

6. Non-yellowing, mildew resistant. 

2.2 CAULKING COMPOUND: 

A. C-1: ASTM C834, acrylic latex. 

B. C-2: One component acoustical caulking, non drying, non hardening, 
synthetic rubber. 

2.3 COLOR: 

A. Sealants used with exposed masonry shall match color of mortar joints. 

B. Sealants used with unpainted concrete shall match color of adjacent 
concrete. 

C. Color of sealants for other locations shall be light gray or aluminum 
as approved by architect, unless specified otherwise. 

D. Caulking shall be light gray or white as approved by architect, unless 
specified otherwise. 

2.4 JOINT SEALANT BACKING: 

A. General: Provide sealant backings of material and type that are 
nonstaining; are compatible with joint substrates, sealants, primers, 
and other joint fillers; and are approved for applications indicated by 
sealant manufacturer based on field experience and laboratory testing. 

B. Cylindrical Sealant Backings: ASTM C1330, of type indicated below and 
of size and density to control sealant depth and otherwise contribute 
to producing optimum sealant performance: 

1. Type C: Closed-cell material with a surface skin. 

C. Elastomeric Tubing Sealant Backings: Neoprene, butyl, EPDM, or silicone 
tubing complying with ASTM D1056, nonabsorbent to water and gas, and 
capable of remaining resilient at temperatures down to minus 32. C 
(minus 26. F). Provide products with low compression set and of size and 
shape to provide a secondary seal, to control sealant depth, and 
otherwise contribute to optimum sealant performance. 

D. Bond-Breaker Tape: Polyethylene tape or other plastic tape recommended 
by sealant manufacturer for preventing sealant from adhering to rigid, 
inflexible joint-filler materials or joint surfaces at back of joint 


where such adhesion would result in sealant failure. Provide selfadhesive 
tape where applicable. 

2.5 FILLER: 

A. Mineral fiber board: ASTM C612, Class 1. 

B. Thickness same as joint width. 

C. Depth to fill void completely behind back-up rod. 

2.6 PRIMER: 

A. As recommended by manufacturer of caulking or sealant material. 

B. Stain free type. 

2.7 CLEANERS-NON POUROUS SURFACES: 

 Chemical cleaners acceptable to manufacturer of sealants and sealant 
backing material, free of oily residues and other substances capable of 
staining or harming joint substrates and adjacent non-porous surfaces 
and formulated to promote adhesion of sealant and substrates. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSPECTION: 

A. Inspect substrate surface for bond breaker contamination and unsound 
materials at adherent faces of sealant. 

B. Coordinate for repair and resolution of unsound substrate materials. 

C. Inspect for uniform joint widths and that dimensions are within 
tolerance established by sealant manufacturer. 

3.2 PREPARATIONS: 

A. Prepare joints in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and SWRI. 

B. Clean surfaces of joint to receive caulking or sealants leaving joint 
dry to the touch, free from frost, moisture, grease, oil, wax, lacquer 
paint, or other foreign matter that would tend to destroy or impair 
adhesion. 

1. Clean porous joint substrate surfaces by brushing, grinding, blast 
cleaning, mechanical abrading, or a combination of these methods to 
produce a clean, sound substrate capable of developing optimum bond 
with joint sealants. 

2. Remove loose particles remaining from above cleaning operations by 
vacuuming or blowing out joints with oil-free compressed air. Porous 
joint surfaces include the following: 

a. Concrete. 

b. Masonry. 

c. Unglazed surfaces of ceramic tile. 

3. Remove laitance and form-release agents from concrete. 


4. Clean nonporous surfaces with chemical cleaners or other means that 
do not stain, harm substrates, or leave residues capable of 
interfering with adhesion of joint sealants. 

a. Metal. 

b. Glass. 

c. Porcelain enamel. 

d. Glazed surfaces of ceramic tile. 

C. Do not cut or damage joint edges. 

D. Apply masking tape to face of surfaces adjacent to joints before 
applying primers, caulking, or sealing compounds. 

1. Do not leave gaps between ends of sealant backings. 

2. Do not stretch, twist, puncture, or tear sealant backings. 

3. Remove absorbent sealant backings that have become wet before 
sealant application and replace them with dry materials. 

E. Apply primer to sides of joints wherever required by compound 
manufacturer's printed instructions. 

1. Apply primer prior to installation of back-up rod or bond breaker 
tape. 

2. Use brush or other approved means that will reach all parts of 
joints. 

F. Take all necessary steps to prevent three sided adhesion of sealants. 

3.3 BACKING INSTALLATION: 

A. Install back-up material, to form joints enclosed on three sides as 
required for specified depth of sealant. 

B. Where deep joints occur, install filler to fill space behind the backup 
rod and position the rod at proper depth. 

C. Cut fillers installed by others to proper depth for installation of 
back-up rod and sealants. 

D. Install back-up rod, without puncturing the material, to a uniform 
depth, within plus or minus 3 mm (1/8 inch) for sealant depths 
specified. 

E. Where space for back-up rod does not exist, install bond breaker tape 
strip at bottom (or back) of joint so sealant bonds only to two 
opposing surfaces. 

F. Take all necessary steps to prevent three sided adhesion of sealants. 

3.4 SEALANT DEPTHS AND GEOMETRY: 

A. At widths up to 6 mm (1/4 inch), sealant depth equal to width. 


B. At widths over 6 mm (1/4 inch), sealant depth 1/2 of width up to 13 mm 
(1/2 inch) maximum depth at center of joint with sealant thickness at 
center of joint approximately 1/2 of depth at adhesion surface. 

3.5 INSTALLATION: 

A. General: 

1. Apply sealants and caulking only when ambient temperature is between 

5. C and 38. C (40. and 100. F). 

2. Do not use polysulfide base sealants where sealant may be exposed to 
fumes from bituminous materials, or where water vapor in continuous 
contact with cementitious materials may be present. 

3. Do not use sealant type listed by manufacture as not suitable for 
use in locations specified. 

4. Apply caulking and sealing compound in accordance with 
manufacturer's printed instructions. 

5. Avoid dropping or smearing compound on adjacent surfaces. 

6. Fill joints solidly with compound and finish compound smooth. 

7. Tool joints to concave surface unless shown or specified otherwise. 

8. Finish paving or floor joints flush unless joint is otherwise 
detailed. 

9. Apply compounds with nozzle size to fit joint width. 

10. Test sealants for compatibility with each other and substrate. Use 
only compatible sealant. 

B. For application of sealants, follow requirements of ASTM C1193 unless 
specified otherwise. 

C. Where gypsum board partitions are of sound rated, fire rated, or smoke 
barrier construction, follow requirements of ASTM C919 only to seal all 
cut-outs and intersections with the adjoining construction unless 
specified otherwise. 

1. Apply a 6 mm (1/4 inch) minimum bead of sealant each side of runners 
(tracks), including those used at partition intersections with 
dissimilar wall construction. 

2. Coordinate with application of gypsum board to install sealant 
immediately prior to application of gypsum board. 

3. Partition intersections: Seal edges of face layer of gypsum board 
abutting intersecting partitions, before taping and finishing or 
application of veneer plaster-joint reinforcing. 


4. Openings: Apply a 6 mm (1/4 inch) bead of sealant around all cutouts 
to seal openings of electrical boxes, ducts, pipes and similar 
penetrations. To seal electrical boxes, seal sides and backs. 

5. Control Joints: Before control joints are installed, apply sealant 
in back of control joint to reduce flanking path for sound through 
control joint. 

3.6 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL: 

A. Field-Adhesion Testing: Field-test joint-sealant adhesion to joint 
substrates as recommended by sealant manufacturer: 

1. Extent of Testing: Test completed elastomeric sealant joints as 
follows: 

a. Perform 10 tests for first 300 m (1000 feet) of joint length for 
each type of elastomeric sealant and joint substrate. 

b. Perform one test for each 300 m (1000 feet) of joint length 
thereafter or one test per each floor per elevation. 

B. Inspect joints for complete fill, for absence of voids, and for joint 
configuration complying with specified requirements. Record results in 
a field adhesion test log. 

C. Inspect tested joints and report on following: 

1. Whether sealants in joints connected to pulled-out portion failed to 
adhere to joint substrates or tore cohesively. Include data on pull 
distance used to test each type of product and joint substrate. 

2. Compare these results to determine if adhesion passes sealant 
manufacturer’s field-adhesion hand-pull test criteria. 

3. Whether sealants filled joint cavities and are free from voids. 

4. Whether sealant dimensions and configurations comply with specified 
requirements. 

D. Record test results in a field adhesion test log. Include dates when 
sealants were installed, names of persons who installed sealants, test 
dates, test locations, whether joints were primed, adhesion results and 
percent elongations, sealant fill, sealant configuration, and sealant 
dimensions. 

E. Repair sealants pulled from test area by applying new sealants 
following same procedures used to originally seal joints. Ensure that 
original sealant surfaces are clean and new sealant contacts original 
sealant. 

F. Evaluation of Field-Test Results: Sealants not evidencing adhesive 
failure from testing or noncompliance with other indicated 


requirements, will be considered satisfactory. Remove sealants that 
fail to adhere to joint substrates during testing or to comply with 
other requirements. Retest failed applications until test results prove 
sealants comply with indicated requirements. 

3.6 CLEANING: 

A. Fresh compound accidentally smeared on adjoining surfaces: Scrape off 
immediately and rub clean with a solvent as recommended by the caulking 
or sealant manufacturer. 

B. After filling and finishing joints, remove masking tape. 

C. Leave adjacent surfaces in a clean and unstained condition. 

3.7 LOCATIONS: 

A. Exterior Building Joints, Horizontal and Vertical: 

1. Metal to Metal: Type S-1, S-2 

2. Metal to Masonry or Stone: Type S-1 

3. Masonry to Masonry or Stone: Type S-1 

7. Masonry Expansion and Control Joints: Type S-6 

B. Metal Reglets and Flashings: 

1. Flashings to Wall: Type S-6 

2. Metal to Metal: Type S-6 

C. Sanitary Joints: 

1. Walls to Plumbing Fixtures: Type S-9 

2. Counter Tops to Walls: Type S-9 

3. Pipe Penetrations: Type S-9 

D. Interior Caulking: 

1. Typical Narrow Joint 6 mm, (1/4 inch) or less at Walls and Adjacent 
Components: Types C-1, C-2. 

2. Joints at Masonry Walls and Columns, Piers, Concrete Walls or 
Exterior Walls: Types C-1, C-2. 

3. Perimeter of Lead Faced Control Windows and Plaster or Gypsum 
Wallboard Walls: Types C-1, C-2. 

4. Exposed Isolation Joints at Top of Full Height Walls: Types C-1, C-2. 

5. Exposed Acoustical Joint at Sound Rated Partitions: Type C-2. 

6. Concealed Acoustic Sealant: Type S-4, C-1, C-2. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 07 95 13 
EXPANSION JOINT COVER ASSEMBLIES 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Section specifies floor, wall and ceiling seismic and building 
expansion joint assemblies. 

B. Types of assemblies: 

 Metal Plate Cover 

 Elastomeric Joint Covers 

 Preformed Elastomeric Sealant Joint 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Sheet Metal Expansion Joint Seals: Section 07 60 00, FLASHING AND SHEET 
METAL. 

B. Roof Expansion Joint Cover Assemblies: Section 07 72 00, ROOF 
ACCESORIES. 

C. Color of Elastomer Inserts, Filler Strips, Exterior Wall Seals and 
Metal Finishes: See drawing set. 

D. Steel Plate Expansion Joint Covers: Section 05 50 00, METAL 
FABRICATIONS. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Project Conditions: 

1. Check actual locations of walls and other construction, to which 
work must fit, by accurate field measurements before fabrication. 

2. Show recorded measurements on final shop drawings. 

B. Fire tests performed by Factory Mutual, Underwriters Laboratories, 
Inc., Warnock Hersey or other approved independent testing laboratory. 

1.4 DELIVERY STORAGE AND HANDLING 

A. Take care in handling of materials so as not to injure finished surface 
and components. 

B. Store materials under cover in a dry and clean location off the ground. 

C. Remove materials which are damaged or otherwise not suitable for 
installation from job site and replace with acceptable materials. 

1.5 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 


1. Submit copies of manufacturer's current literature and data for each 
item specified. 

2. Clearly indicate movement capability of cover assemblies and 
suitability of material used in exterior seals for ultraviolet 
exposure. 

C. Certificates: Material test reports from approved independent testing 
laboratory indicating and interpreting test results relative to 
compliance of fire-rated expansion joint assemblies with requirements 
specified. 

D. Shop Drawings: 

1. Showing full extent of expansion joint cover assemblies; include 
large-scale details indicating profiles of each type of expansion 
joint cover assembly, splice joints between sections, joiners with 
other type assemblies, special end conditions, anchorages, 
fasteners, and relationship to adjoining work and finishes. 

2. Include description of materials and finishes and installation 
instructions. 

E. Samples: 

1. Samples of each type and color of metal finish on metal of same 
thickness and alloy used in work. 

2. Samples of each type and color of flexible seal used in work. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed form part of this specification to extent 
referenced. Publications are referred to in text by basic designation 
only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A36/A36M-08.............Structural Steel 

A240/A240M-14...........Standard Specification for Chromium and 
Chromium-Nickel Stainless Steel Plate, Sheet 
and Strip for Pressure Vessels and for General 
Applications. 

A283/A283M-07...........Low and Intermediate Tensile Strength Carbon 
Steel Plates 

A786/A786M-05(R2009)....Rolled Steel Floor Plates 

B36/B36M-08.............Brass, Plate, Sheet, Strip, and Rolled Bar 

B121-01(R2006)..........Leaded Brass Plate, Sheet, Strip and Rolled Bar 

B209M-07................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate 
(Metric) 


B221M-08................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, 
Rods, Wire, Shapes, and Tubes (Metric) 

B455-10.................Copper-Zinc Lead Alloy (Leaded Brass) Extruded 
Shapes 

C864-05.................Dense Elastomeric Compression Seal Gaskets, 
Setting Blocks, and Spacers 

C920-11.................Elastomeric Joint Sealants 

D1187-97 (R2002)........Asphalt Base Emulsions for Use as Protective 
Coatings for Metal 

D2287-96 (R2010)........Non-rigid Vinyl Chloride Polymer and Copolymer 
Molding and Extrusion Compounds 

E119-10.................Fire Tests of Building Construction and 
Materials 

E814-11.................Fire Tests of Through-Penetration Fire Stops 

C. Federal Specifications (Fed. Spec): 

TT-P-645B...............Primer, Paint, Zinc-Molybdate, Alkyd Type 

D. The National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM): 

AMP 500 Series..........Metal Finishes Manual. 

E. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

251-06..................Tests of Fire Endurance of Building 
Construction and Materials 

F. Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL): 

263-11..................Fire Tests of Building Construction and 
Materials 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. Stainless Steel: ASTM A240, Type 302 or 304. 

B. Structural Steel Shapes: ASTM A36. 

C. Steel Plate: ASTM A283, Grade C. 

D. Rolled Steel Floor Plate: ASTM A786. 

E. Aluminum: 

1. Extruded: ASTM B221, alloy 6063-T5. 

2. Plate and Sheet: ASTM B209, alloy 6061-T6. 

F. Bronze: 

1. Extruded: ASTM B455. 

2. Plate: ASTM B121. 

G. Brass: ASTM B36. 

H. Elastomeric Sealant: 


1. ASTM C920, polyurethane. 

2. Type. 

3. Class 25. 

4. Grade P or NS. 

5. Shore A hardness 25, unless specified otherwise. 

I. Thermoplastic Rubber: 

1. ASTM C864. 

2. Dense Neoprene or other material standard with expansion joint 
manufacturers having the same physical properties. 

J. Vinyl Invertor Sealant Waterstops: Manufacturers’ standard shapes and 
grade. 

K. Fire Barrier: 

1. Designed for indicated or required dynamic structural movement 
without material degradation or fatigue. 

2. Tested in maximum joint width condition as a component of an 
expansion joint cover assembly in accordance with UL 263 NFPA 251, 
or ASTM E119 and E814, including hose steam test at full-rated 
period. 

L. Zinc-Molybdate Primer: Fed. Spec. TT-P-645. 

M. Accessories: 

1. Manufacturer's standard anchors, fasteners, set screws, spaces, 
flexible secondary water stops or seals and filler materials, drain 
tubes, adhesive and other accessories as indicated or required for 
complete installations. 

2. Compatible with materials in contact. 

3. Water stops. 

2.2 FABRICATION 

A. General: 

1. Use ceiling and wall expansion joint cover assemblies of same design 
as floor to wall and floor to floor expansion joint cover 
assemblies. Unless shown otherwise. 

2. Provide expansion joint cover assemblies of design, basic profile, 
materials and operation indicated required to accommodate joint size 
variations in adjacent surfaces, and as required for anticipated 
structural movement. 

3. Deliver to job site ready for use and fabricated in as large 
sections and assemblies as practical. Assemblies identical to 
submitted and reviewed shop drawings, samples and certificates. 


4. Furnish units in longest practicable lengths to minimize number of 
end joints. Provide mitered corners where joint changes directions 
or abuts other materials. 

5. Include closure materials and transition pieces, tee-joints, 
corners, curbs, cross-connections and other assemblies. 

6. Fire Performance Characteristics: 

a. Provide expansion joint cover assemblies identical to those of 
assemblies whose fire resistance has been determined per ASTM 
E119 and E814, NFPA 251, or UL 263 including hose stream test at 
full-rated period. 

b. Fire rating: Not less than rating of adjacent floor or wall 
construction. 

7. Fire Barrier Systems: 

a. Material to carry label of approved independent testing 
laboratory, and be subject to follow-up system for quality 
assurance. 

b. Include thermal insulation where necessary, in accordance with 
above tests, with factory cut miters and transitions. 

c. For joint widths up to and including 150 mm (six inches), supply 
barrier in lengths up to 15000 mm (50 feet) to eliminate field 
splicing. 

d. For joint widths of seven inches and wider, supply barrier 3000 
mm (10-foot) modules with overlapping ends for field splicing. 

e. For joints within enclosed spaces such as chase walls, include 1 
mm (0.032-inch) thick galvanized steel cover where conventional 
expansion joint cover is not used. 

8. Seal Strip factory - formed and bonded to metal frames and anchor 
members. 

9. Compression Seals: Prefabricate from thermoplastic rubber or dense 
neoprene to sizes and approximate profiles shown. 

B. Floor-to-Floor Metal Plate Joints: 

1. Frames on each side of joint designed to support cover plate of 
design shown. 

a. Continuous frame designed to finish flush with adjacent floor of 
profile indicated with seating surface and raised floor rim to 
accommodate flooring. 

b. Provide concealed bolt and steel anchors for embedment in 
concrete. 


c. Designed for filler materials between raised rim of frame and 
edge of cover plate where shown. 

d. Frame and cover plates of some metal where exposed. 

1) Design cover plates to support 180 Kg (400 lbs) per 0.3 square 
meters (1-square foot). 

2) Cover plates free of rattle due to traffic. 

3) No gaps or budges occur on filler material during design 
movement of joint. 

4) Provide manufacturer's continuous standard flexible vinyl 
water stop under floor joint cover assemblies. 

C. Floor-to-Wall Metal Plate Joints: 

1. Provide one frame on floor side of joint only. Provide wall side 
frame where required by manufacturer's design. 

2. Angle Cover Plates: Provide angle cover plates for joints to wall 
with countersunk flat-head exposed fasteners for securing to wall 
unless shown otherwise. 

3. Space fasteners as recommended by manufacturer. 

4. Match cover of adjacent floor to floor cover. 

D. Interior Wall Joint Cover Assemblies: 

1. Surface Mounted Metal Cover Plates: 

a. Concealed frame for fastening to wall on one sides of joint. 

b. Extend cover to lap each side of joint and to permit free 
movement on one side. 

c. Provide concealed attachment of cover t frame cover in close 
contact with adjacent finish wall surfaces. 

d. Use angle cover plates at intersection of walls. 

e. Use smooth surface cover plates matching floor plates. 

f. Use expansion fire inserts in fire rated walls, rated same as 
hour rating of wall. 

E. Exterior Wall Joint Assemblies: 

1. Variable movement with seal designed to prevent water and air 
infiltration. 

2. Use vinyl seal strip as secondary seal behind primary seal. 

3. Cover Plate Assemblies: 

a. Surface mounted cover plate. 

b. Concealed frame for fastening to wall on one side of joint. 

c. Extend cover to lap each side of joint and to permit free 
movement on one side. 


d. Provide concealed attachment of cover to frame for cover with 
cover in close contact with adjacent finish surfaces. 

e. Use angle cover plate of intersection of walls. 

4. Extruded thermoplastic rubber joint assemblies. 

a. Aluminum frames both sides of joint. 

1) Designed to receive flexible rubber primary seal on exposed 
face after installation of frame. 

2) Designed to receive continuous secondary vinyl sheet seal. 

3) Anchor spaced at ends and not over 600 mm (24-inches). 

b. Variable movement extruded rubber primary seal designed to remain 
in aluminum frame, throughout movement of joint. 

1) Flush mounted seal minimum 3 mm (0.125-inch) thick with dual 
movement grooves designed for plus or minus 50 percent, 
movement of joint width. 

2) Seismic seal minimum 3 mm (0.125-inch) thick with multi-movement 
grooves designed for plus or minus 100 percent movement of 
joint width. 

3) Recessed front face seal minimum 3 mm (0.125-inch) thick with no 
movement grooves, designed for plus or minus 50 percent 
movement of joint width. 

c. Provide factory heat welded transitions where directional changes 
occur to ensure a watertight system. 

d. Provide pantographic wind load supports, maximum 2400 mm (8 feet) 
on center to support seal systems of 300 mm (12-inches) and 
wider. 

E. Ceiling and Soffit Assemblies: 

1. Variable movement vinyl insert in metal frame on both sides of 
joint. 

2. Designed for flush mounting with no exposed fasteners. 

3. Vinyl insert locked into metal frame. 

4. Vinyl and metal finish as specified in drawings. 

5. Vinyl insert semi rigid either flush face or accordion shape as 
showed to span joint width without sagging. 

F. Garage Floor Joint Cover Plate: 

1. Aluminum steel over plate not less than 9 mm (3/8-inch) with edges 
beveled, smooth finish, drilled for counterwork screw at ends and 
not over 600 mm (24-inches) o.c. 


2. Angle edge frame with anchors at ends and not over 600 mm (24- 
inches) between end anchors. 

3. Use stud bolt anchors not less than 200 mm (4-inches) long and 9 mm 
(3/8-inch) diameter welded to angle. 

4. Angle size as shown. 

5. Drill and top one angle for screws from cover plate. 

G. Preformed Sealant Joint: Factory installed elastomeric sealant between 
extruded aluminum angle frame both sides. 

1. Elastomeric Sealant: Two part polyurethane sealant with movement 
capability of +/- 25% of joint width per ASTM-C-920, Type M, Grade 
P, Class 25, Shore A hardness of 25+/-5. 

a. Color: 

2. Frame: Extruded Aluminum: anodized. 

3. Anticipated movement: (+/- 25%). 

2.3 METAL FINISHES 

A. General: 

1. Apply finishes in factory after products are fabricated. 

2. Protect finishes on exposed surfaces with protective covering before 
shipment. 

B. Aluminum Finishes: 

1. Finish letters and numbers for anodized aluminum are in accordance 
with the NAAMM AMP 501, Aluminum Association's Designation System). 

a. Clear anodized finish: AA-C22A41 Chemically etched medium matte, 
clear anodic coating, Class I Architectural, 0.7 - mil thick. 

b. Color anodized finish: Chemically etched medium matte, integrally 
colored anodic coating, Chemically etched medium matte, 
electrolytically deposited metallic compound, Class I 
Architectural, 0.7-mil thick finish. Dyes not accepted. 

2. Fluorocarbon Finish: NAAMM AMP 503 AAMA 605.2, high performance 
organic coating. 

3. Factory-Primed Concealed Surface: NAAMM AMP 505 Protect concealed 
aluminum surfaces that will be in contact with plaster, concrete or 
masonry surfaces when installed by applying a shop coat of zincmolybdate 
primer to contact surfaces. Provide minimum dry film 
thickness of 2.0 mils. 

C. Bronze Finish: NAAMM-AMP 502-M32, mechanical finish, directional 
textured, natural medium satin. 

D. Stainless Steel: NAAMM AMP 503, finish No. 2B. 


E. Carbon Steel: NAAMM AMP 504, Galvanized 690. 

PART 3 EXECUTION 

3.1 EXAMINATION 

A. Manufacturer’s representative shall make a thorough examination of 
surfaces receiving work of this section. 

B. Before starting installation, notify prime contractor of defects which 
would affect satisfactory completion of work. 

3.2 PREPARATION 

A. Verify measurements and dimensions at job site and cooperate in 
coordination and scheduling of work with work of related trades. 

B. Give particular attention to installation of items embedded in concrete 
and masonry so as not to delay job progress. 

C. Provide templates to related trade for location of support and 
anchorage items. 

3.3 INSTALLATION 

A. Install in accordance with manufacturers installation instructions 
unless specified otherwise. 

B. Provide anchorage devices and fasteners for securing expansion joint 
assemblies to in-place construction including threaded fasteners with 
drilled-in fasteners for masonry and concrete where anchoring members 
are not embedded in concrete. Provide metal fasteners of type and size 
to suit type of construction indicated and provide for secure 
attachment of expansion joint cover assemblies. 

C. Perform cutting, drilling and fitting required for installation of 
expansion joint cover assemblies. 

D. Install joint cover assemblies in true alignment and proper 
relationship to expansion joint opening and adjoining finished surfaces 
measured from established lines and levels. 

E. Allow for thermal expansion and contraction of metal to avoid buckling. 

F. Set floor covers at elevations flush with adjacent finished floor 
materials unless shown otherwise. 

G. Material and method of grouting floor frames set in prepared recesses 
in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. 

H. Locate wall, ceiling and soffit covers in continuous contact with 
adjacent surfaces. Securely attach in place with required accessories. 

I. Locate anchors at interval recommended by manufacturer, but not less 
than 75 mm (3-inches) from each ends, and, not more than 600 mm (24- 
inches) on centers. 


J. Maintain continuity of expansion joint cover assemblies with end joints 
held to a minimum and metal members aligned mechanically using splice 
joints. 

K. Cut and fit ends to produce joints that will accommodate thermal 
expansion and contraction of metal to avoid buckling of frames or 
plates. 

L. Flush Metal Cover Plates: 

1. Secure flexible filler between frames so that it will compress and 
expand. 

2. Adhere flexible filler materials to frames with adhesive or 
pressure-sensitive tape as recommended by manufacturer. 

M. Waterstops: 

1. Install in conjunction with floor joints and where shown, run 
continuously to prevent water damage to finish spaces. 

2. Provide seal with frame to prevent water leakage. 

3. Provide outlet tubes from waterstops to drain to prevent damage to 
finish spaces. 

N. Fire Barriers: 

1. Install in compliance with tested assembly. 

2. Install in floors and in fire rated walls. 

3. Use fire barrier sealant or caulk supplied with system. 

O. Sealants: 

 Install to prevent water and air infiltration. 

P. Vertical Exterior Extruded Thermoplastic Rubber. 

1. Install side frames mounted on sealant or butyl caulk tape with 
appropriate anchors 600 mm (24 inches) on center complete with 
independent continuous PVC back seal. 

2. Install primary seals retained in extruded aluminum side frames. 

Q. Installation of Extruded Thermoplastic Rubber or Seals: 

1. For straight sections, provide preformed seals in continuous 
lengths. 

2. Vulcanize or heat-seal field splice joints to provide watertight 
joints using manufacturer's recommended procedures. 

R. Installation of Preformed Elastomeric Sealant Joint: 

1. Locate joint directly over joints in wall or floor substrates. 

2. Full length shall be fastened to substrate using a construction 
adhesive. 

3. Install flush or slightly below finish material. 


3.4 PROTECTION 

A. Take proper precautions to protect the expansion joint covers from 
damage after they are in place. 

B. Cover floor joints with plywood where wheel traffic occurs. 

- - - E N D - - - 

 


SECTION 08 11 13 
HOLLOW METAL DOORS AND FRAMES 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies steel doors, steel frames and related 
components. 

B. Terms relating to steel doors and frames as defined in ANSI A123.1 and 
as specified. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Door Hardware: Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

B. Glazing and ballistic rated glazing: Section 08 80 00, GLAZING. 

1.3 TESTING 

 An independent testing laboratory shall perform testing. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturers Literature and Data: 

1. Fire rated doors and frames, showing conformance with NFPA 80 and 
Underwriters Laboratory, Inc., or Intertek Testing Services or 
Factory Mutual fire rating requirements. 

2. Sound rated doors, including test report from Testing Laboratory. 

1.5 SHIPMENT 

A. Prior to shipment label each door and frame to show location, size, 
door swing and other pertinent information. 

B. Fasten temporary steel spreaders across the bottom of each door frame. 

1.6 STORAGE AND HANDLING 

A. Store doors and frames at the site under cover. 

B. Protect from rust and damage during storage and erection until 
completion. 

1.7 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by the basic 
designation only. 

B. Federal Specifications (Fed. Spec.): 

L-S-125B................Screening, Insect, Nonmetallic 

C. Door and Hardware Institute (DHI): 

A115 Series.............Steel Door and Frame Preparation for Hardware, 
Series A115.1 through A115.17 (Dates Vary) 


D. Steel Door Institute (SDI): 

113-01 (R2006)..........Thermal Transmittance of Steel Door and Frame 
Assemblies 

128-09..................Acoustical Performance for Steel Door and Frame 
Assemblies 

E. American National Standard Institute: 

A250.8-2003 (R2008).....Specifications for Standard Steel Doors and 
Frames 

F. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-99(R2009)..........Stainless and Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel 
Steel Plate, Sheet, and Strip 

A568/568-M-11...........Steel, Sheet, Carbon, and High-Strength, Lowalloy, 
Hot-Rolled and Cold-Rolled 

A1008-10................Steel, sheet, Cold-Rolled, Carbon, Structural, 
High Strength Low Alloy and High Strength Low 
Alloy with Improved Formability 

B209/209M-10............Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate 

B221/221M-12............Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, 
Rods, Wire, Profiles and Tubes 

D1621-10................Compressive Properties of Rigid Cellular 
Plastics 

D3656-07................Insect Screening and Louver Cloth Woven from 
Vinyl Coated Glass Yarns 

E90-09..................Laboratory Measurement of Airborne Sound 
Transmission Loss of Building Partitions 

G. The National Association Architectural Metal Manufactures (NAAMM): 

Metal Finishes Manual (AMP 500-06) 

H. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

80-13...................Fire Doors and Fire Windows 

I. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

Fire Resistance Directory 

J. Intertek Testing Services (ITS): 

Certifications Listings…Latest Edition 

K. Factory Mutual System (FM): 

Approval Guide 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. Sheet Steel: ASTM A1008, cold-rolled for panels (face sheets) of doors. 


B. Anchors, Fastenings and Accessories: Fastenings anchors, clips 
connecting members and sleeves from zinc coated steel. 

C. Prime Paint: Paint that meets or exceeds the requirements of A250.8. 

2.2 FABRICATION GENERAL 

A. GENERAL: 

1. Follow ANSI A250.8 for fabrication of standard steel doors, except 
as specified otherwise. Doors to receive hardware specified in 
Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. Tolerances as per ANSI A250.8. 
Thickness, 44 mm (1-3/4 inches), unless otherwise shown. 

2. Close top edge of exterior doors flush and seal to prevent water 
intrusion. 

3. When vertical steel stiffeners are used for core construction, fill 
spaces between stiffeners with mineral fiber insulation. 

B. Standard Duty Doors: ANSI A250.8, Level 1, Full flush seamless design 
of size and design shown. Use for interior locations only. Do not use 
for stairwell doors, security doors and detention doors. 

C. Heavy Duty Doors: ANSI A250.8, Level 2, Full flush seamless design of 
size and design shown. Core construction types a, d, or f, for interior 
doors, and, types b, c, e, or f, for exterior doors. 

D. Smoke Doors: 

1. Close top and vertical edges flush. 

2. Provide seamless vertical edges. 

3. Apply Steel astragal to the meeting style at the active leaf of pair 
of doors or double egress doors. 

4. Provide clearance at head, jamb and sill as specified in NFPA 80. 

E. Fire Rated Doors (Labeled): 

1. Conform to NFPA 80 when tested by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 
Inchcape Testing Services, or Factory Mutual for the class of door 
or door opening shown. 

2. Fire rated labels of metal, with raised or incised markings of 
approving laboratory shall be permanently attached to doors. 

3. Close top and vertical edges of doors flush. Vertical edges shall be 
seamless. Apply steel astragal to the meeting stile of the active 
leaf of pairs of fire rated doors, except where vertical rod exit 
devices are specified for both leaves swinging in the same 
direction. 

4. Construct fire rated doors in stairwell enclosures for maximum 
transmitted temperature rise of 230 .C (450 .F) above ambient 


temperature at end of 30 minutes of fire exposure when tested in 
accordance with ASTM E152. 

F. Sound Rated Doors: 

1. SDI 114, except as specified otherwise. 

2. Sound Transmission Class minimum of 45 when tested in accordance 
with ASTM E90. 

3. Doors complete with integral spring type automatic door bottom seal 
and with integral continuous gaskets on the frames. Applied spring 
type automatic door bottom seal and applied continuous gaskets for 
the frames for doors that are not sound rated but sealed for 
flanking noises are specified in Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

4. Fabricate vision panels to receive double glazing where shown. 

2.3 METAL FRAMES 

A. General: 

1. ANSI A250.8, 1.3 mm (0.053 inch) thick sheet steel, types and styles 
as shown or scheduled. 

2. Frames for exterior doors: Fabricate from 1.7 mm (0.067 inch) thick 
galvanized steel conforming to ASTM A525. 

3. Frames for labeled fire rated doors and windows. 

a. Comply with NFPA 80. Test by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 
Inchcape Testing Services, or Factory Mutual. 

b. Fire rated labels of approving laboratory permanently attached to 
frames as evidence of conformance with these requirements. 
Provide labels of metal or engraved stamp, with raised or incised 
markings. 

4. Frames for lead-lined doors: 

a. Frames for doors 900 mm (3 feet) or less in width and having lead 
lining of 1 mm or less in thickness, and not shown to have 
structural steel supports: Minimum 1.7 mm (0.067 inch) thick. 

b. Frames for doors over 900 mm (3 feet) in width or having 
lead-lining more than 1 mm in thickness shown to be supported by 
and attached to structural steel subframes: Minimum 1.3 mm (0.053 
inch) thick. 

c. Lead-lining and its application are specified in Section 13 49 
00, RADIATION PROTECTION. 

5. Frames for detention door (Type 22): Minimum 2 mm (0.093 inch) 
thick. 


6. Frames for doors specified to have automatic door operators: minimum 
1.7 mm (0.067 inch) thick. 

7. Knocked-down frames are not acceptable. 

B. Reinforcement and Covers: 

1. ANSI A250.8 for, minimum thickness of steel reinforcement welded to 
back of frames. 

C. Terminated Stops: ANSI A250.8. 

D. Glazed Openings and Panel Opening: 

a. Integral stop on exterior, corridor, or secure side of door. 

b. Design rabbet width and depth to receive glazing material or panel 
shown or specified. 

E. Frame Anchors: 

1. Floor anchors: 

a. Where floor fills occur, provide extension type floor anchors to 
compensate for depth of fill. 

b. At bottom of jamb use 1.3 mm (0.053 inch) thick steel clip angles 
welded to jamb and drilled to receive two 6 mm (1/4 inch) floor 
bolts. Use 50 mm x 50 mm (2 inch by 2 inch) 9 mm by (3/8 inch) 
clip angle for lead lined frames, drilled for 9 mm (3/8 inch) 
floor bolts. 

c. Where mullions occur, provide 2.3 mm (0.093 inch) thick steel 
channel anchors, drilled for two 6 mm (1/4 inch) floor bolts and 
frame anchor screws. 

d. Where sill sections occur, provide continuous 1 mm (0.042 inch) 
thick steel rough bucks drilled for 6 mm (1/4 inch) floor bolts 
and frame anchor screws. Space floor bolts at 50 mm (24 inches) 
on center. 

2. Jamb anchors: 

a. Locate anchors on jambs near top and bottom of each frame, and at 
intermediate points not over 600 mm (24 inches) apart, except for 
fire rated frames space anchors as required by labeling 
authority. 

b. Form jamb anchors of not less than 1 mm (0.042 inch) thick steel 
unless otherwise specified. 

c. Anchors set in masonry: Use adjustable anchors designed for 
friction fit against the frame and for extension into the masonry 
not less than 250 mm (10 inches). Use one of following type: 

1) Wire loop type of 5 mm (3/16 inch) diameter wire. 


2) T-shape or strap and stirrup type of corrugated or perforated 
sheet steel. 

d. Anchors for stud partitions: Either weld to frame or use lock-in 
snap-in type. Provide tabs for securing anchor to the sides of 
the studs. 

e. Anchors for frames set in prepared openings: 

1) Steel pipe spacers with 6 mm (1/4 inch) inside diameter welded 
to plate reinforcing at jamb stops or hat shaped formed strap 
spacers, 50 mm (2 inches) wide, welded to jamb near stop. 

2) Drill jamb stop and strap spacers for 6 mm (1/4 inch) flat 
head bolts to pass thru frame and spacers. 

3) Two piece frames: Subframe or rough buck drilled for 6 mm (1/4 
inch) bolts. 

f. Anchors for observation windows and other continuous frames set 
in stud partitions. 

1) In addition to jamb anchors, weld clip anchors to sills and 
heads of continuous frames over 1200 mm (4 feet) long. 

2) Anchors spaced 600 mm (24 inches) on centers maximum. 

g. Modify frame anchors to fit special frame and wall construction 
and provide special anchors where shown or required. 

2.4 SHOP PAINTING 

 ANSI A250.8. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Plumb, align and brace frames securely until permanent anchors are set. 

1. Use triangular bracing near each corner on both sides of frames with 
temporary wood spreaders at midpoint. 

2. Use wood spreaders at bottom of frame if the shipping spreader is 
removed. 

3. Protect frame from accidental abuse. 

4. Where construction will permit concealment, leave the shipping 
spreaders in place after installation, otherwise remove the 
spreaders after the frames are set and anchored. 

5. Remove wood spreaders and braces only after the walls are built and 
jamb anchors are secured. 

B. Floor Anchors: 


1. Anchor the bottom of door frames to floor with two 6 mm (1/4 inch) 
diameter expansion bolts. Use 9 mm (3/8 inch) bolts on lead lined 
frames. 

2. Power actuated drive pins may be used to secure frame anchors to 
concrete floors. 

B. Jamb Anchors: 

1. Anchors in masonry walls: Embed anchors in mortar. Fill space 
between frame and masonry wall with grout or mortar as walls are 
built. 

2. Coat frame back with a bituminous coating prior to lining of grout 
filling in masonry walls. 

3. Secure anchors to sides of studs with two fasteners through anchor 
tabs. Use steel drill screws to steel studs. 

4. Frames set in prepared openings of masonry or concrete: Expansion 
bolt to wall with 6 mm (1/4 inch) expansion bolts through spacers. 
Where subframes or rough bucks are used, 6 mm (1/4 inch) expansion 
bolts on 600 mm (24 inch) centers or power activated drive pins 600 
mm (24 inches) on centers. Secure two piece frames to subframe or 
rough buck with machine screws on both faces. 

C. Install anchors for labeled fire rated doors to provide rating as 
required. 

D. Frames for Sound Rated Doors: Coordinate to line frames for sound rated 
doors with insulation. 

E. Overhead Bracing (Lead Lined Frames): Where jamb extensions extend to 
structure above, anchor clip angles with not less than two, 9 mm (3/8 
inch) expansion bolts or power actuated drive pins to concrete slab. 
Weld to steel overhead members. 

3.2 INSTALLATION OF DOORS AND APPLICATION OF HARDWARE 

 Install doors and hardware as specified in Section 08 11 13, HOLLOW 
METAL DOORS AND FRAMES, Section 08 14 00, INTERIOR WOOD DOORS, and 
Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 08 14 00 
INTERIOR WOOD DOORS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies interior flush doors with prefinish, prefit 
option. 

B. Section includes fire rated doors, sound retardant doors, smoke, and 
dutch doors. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Metal door frames: Section 08 11 13, HOLLOW METAL DOORS AND FRAMES. 

B. Door hardware including hardware location (height): Section 08 71 00, 
DOOR HARDWARE. 

C. Installation of doors and hardware: Section 08 11 13, HOLLOW METAL 
DOORS AND FRAMES, Section 08 14 00, INTERIOR WOOD DOORS, or Section 08 
71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

D. Glazing: Section 08 80 00, GLAZING. 

E. Finish: As indicated on drawings. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Samples: 

1. Corner section of flush veneered door 300 mm (12 inches) square, 
showing details of construction, labeled to show grade and type 
number and conformance to specified standard. 

2. Veneer sample 200 mm (8 inch) by 275 mm (11 inch) by 6 mm (1/4 inch) 
showing specified wood species sanded to receive a transparent 
finish. Factory finish veneer sample where the prefinished option is 
accepted. 

C. Shop Drawings: 

1. Show every door in project and schedule location in building. 

2. Indicate type, grade, finish and size; include detail of glazing, 
sound gasketing and pertinent details. 

3. Provide information concerning specific requirements not included in 
the manufacturer's literature and data submittal. 

D. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Sound rated doors, including test report indicating STC rating per 
ASTM E90 from test laboratory. 

2. Labeled fire rated doors showing conformance with NFPA 80. 


E. Laboratory Test Reports: 

1. Screw holding capacity test report in accordance with WDMA T.M.10. 

2. Split resistance test report in accordance with WDMA T.M.5. 

3. Cycle/Slam test report in accordance with WDMA T.M.7. 

4. Hinge-Loading test report in accordance with WDMA T.M.8. 

1.4 WARRANTY 

A. Doors are subject to terms of Article titled “Warranty of 
Construction”, FAR clause 52.246-21, except that warranty shall be as 
follows: 

1. For interior doors, manufacturer’s warranty for lifetime of original 
installation. 

2. Specified STC RATING for sound retardant rated door assembly in 
place. 

1.5 DELIVERY AND STORAGE 

A. Factory seal doors and accessories in minimum of 6 mill polyethylene 
bags or cardboard packages which shall remain unbroken during delivery 
and storage. 

B. Store in accordance with WDMA I.S.1-A, Job Site Information. 

C. Label package for door opening where used. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

 Publications listed below form a part of this specification to extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in text by basic designation 
only. 

A. Window and Door Manufacturers Association (WDMA): 

I.S.1A-11...............Architectural Wood Flush Doors 

I.S.4-09................Water-Repellent Preservative Non-Pressure 
Treatment for Millwork 

I.S.6A-11...............Architectural Wood Stile and Rail Doors 

T.M.6-08................Adhesive (Glue Bond) Durability Test Method 

T.M.7-08................Cycle-Slam Test Method 

T.M.8-08................Hinge Loading Test Method 

T.M.10-08...............Screwholding Test Method 

B. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

80-10...................Protection of Buildings from Exterior Fire 

252-08..................Fire Tests of Door Assemblies 

C. ASTM International (ASTM): 

E90-09..................Laboratory Measurements of Airborne Sound 
Transmission Loss 


 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 FLUSH DOORS 

A. General: 

1. Meet requirements of WDMA I.S.1-A, Extra Heavy Duty. 

2. Adhesive: Type II 

3. Thickness: 45 mm (1-3/4 inches) unless otherwise shown or specified. 

B. Face Veneer: 

1. In accordance with WDMA I.S.1-A. 

2. One species throughout the project unless scheduled or otherwise 
shown. 

3. For transparent finishes: Premium Grade. Plain sliced. . 

a. AA grade face veneer 

b. Match face veneers for doors for uniform effect of color and 
grain at joints. 

c. Door edges shall be same species as door face veneer except maple 
may be used for stile face veneer on birch doors. 

 d. In existing buildings, where doors are required to have 
transparent finish, use wood species and grade of face veneers to 
match adjacent existing doors. 

4. Factory sand doors for finishing. 

C. Wood for stops, louvers, muntins and moldings of flush doors required 
to have transparent finish: 

1. Solid Wood of same species as face veneer, except maple may be used 
on birch doors. 

2. Glazing: 

a. On non-labeled doors use applied wood stops nailed tight on room 
side and attached on opposite side with flathead, countersunk 
wood screws, spaced approximately 125 mm (5 inches) on centers. 

b. Use stainless steel or dull chrome plated brass screws for 
exterior doors. 

D. Fire rated wood doors: 

1. Fire Performance Rating: 

a. “B” label, 1-1/2 hours. 

b. “C” label, 3/4 hour. 

2. Labels: 

a. Doors shall conform to the requirements of ASTM E2074, or NFPA 
252, and, carry an identifying label from a qualified testing and 


inspection agency for class of door or opening shown designating 
fire performance rating. 

b. Metal labels with raised or incised markings. 

3. Performance Criteria for Stiles of doors utilizing standard mortise 
leaf hinges: 

a. Hinge Loading: WDMA T.M.8. Average of 10 test samples for Extra 
Heavy Duty doors. 

b. Direct screw withdrawal: WDMA T.M.10 for Extra Heavy Duty doors. 
Average of 10 test samples using a steel, fully threaded #12 wood 
screw. 

c. Cycle Slam: 1,000,000 cycles with no loose hinge screws or other 
visible signs of failure when tested in accordance with WDMA 

 T.M.7. 

4. Additional Hardware Reinforcement: 

a. Provide fire rated doors with hardware reinforcement blocking. 

b. Size of lock blocks as required to secure hardware specified. 

c. Top, bottom and intermediate rail blocks shall measure not less 
than 125 mm (five inches) minimum by full core width. 

d. Reinforcement blocking in compliance with manufacturer's labeling 
requirements. 

e. Mineral material similar to core is not acceptable. 

5. Other Core Components: Manufacturer's standard as allowed by the 
labeling requirements. 

6. Provide steel frame approved for use in labeled doors for vision 
panels. 

7. Provide steel astragal on pair of doors. 

E. Smoke Barrier Doors: 

1. For glazed openings use steel frames approved for use in labeled 
doors. 

2. Provide a steel astragal on one leaf of pairs of doors, including 
double egress doors. 

F. Sound Rated Doors: 

1. Fabricated as specified for flush wood doors with additional 
construction requirements to meet specified sound transmission class 
(STC). 

2. STC Rating of the door assembly in place when tested in accordance 
with ASTM E90 by an independent nationally recognized acoustical 
testing laboratory not less than 36. 


3. Accessories: 

a. Frame Gaskets: Continuous closed cell sponge neoprene with stop 
adjusters. 

b. Automatic Door Bottom Seal: 

1) Steel spring operated, closed cell sponge neoprene metal 
mounted removable in extruded aluminum housing with a medium 
matte 0.1 mm (4.0 mil) thick clear Anodized finish. 

2) Concealed or Surface Mounted. 

G. Dutch Doors: 

1. Consist of two sections, each fabricated as specified for flush 
doors. 

2. Construct shelf as detailed, from clear hardwood stock, or laminated 
plastic door shelf, same species as face veneer of door. 

3. Place shelf on top of lower section of door and support as shown 
with a pair of wood or wrought steel brackets. 

4. Prime steel brackets for finish painting. 

2.2 PREFINISH, PREFIT OPTION 

A. Flush doors may be factory machined to receive hardware, bevels, 
undercuts, cutouts, accessories and fitting for frame. 

B. Factory fitting to conform to specification for shop and field fitting, 
including factory application of sealer to edge and routings. 

C. Flush doors to receive transparent finish (in addition to being prefit) 
shall be factory finished as follows: 

1. WDMA I.S.1-A Section F-3 specification for System TR-4, Conversion 
Varnish or System TR-5, Catalyzed Vinyl. 

2. Use stain when required to produce the finish specified on drawings. 

2.3 IDENTIFICATION MARK: 

A. On top edge of door. 

B. Either a stamp, brand or other indelible mark, giving manufacturer’s 
name, door’s trade name, construction of door, code date of manufacture 
and quality. 

C. Accompanied by either of the following additional requirements: 

1. An identification mark or a separate certification including name of 
inspection organization. 

2. Identification of standards for door, including glue type. 

3. Identification of veneer and quality certification. 

4. Identification of preservative treatment for stile and rail doors. 


2.4 SEALING: 

A. Give top and bottom edge of doors two coats of catalyzed polyurethane 
or water resistant sealer before sealing in shipping containers. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 DOOR PREPARATION 

A. Field, shop or factory preparation: Do not violate the qualified 
testing and inspection agency label requirements for fire rated doors. 

B. Clearances between Doors and Frames and Floors: 

1. Maximum 3 mm (1/8 inch) clearance at the jambs, heads, and meeting 
stiles, and a 19 mm (3/4 inch) clearance at bottom, except as 
otherwise specified. 

2. Maximum clearance at bottom of sound rated doors, light-proofed 
doors, doors to operating rooms, and doors designated to be fitted 
with mechanical seal: 10 mm (3/8 inch). 

C. Provide cutouts for special details required and specified. 

D. Rout doors for hardware using templates and location heights specified 
in Section, 08 71 00 DOOR HARDWARE. 

E. Fit doors to frame, bevel lock edge of doors 3 mm (1/8 inch) for each 
50 mm (two inches) of door thickness undercut where shown. 

F. Immediately after fitting and cutting of doors for hardware, seal cut 
edges of doors with two coats of water resistant sealer. 

G. Finish surfaces, including both faces, top and bottom and edges of the 
doors smooth to touch. 

H. Apply a steel astragal on the opposite side of active door on pairs of 
fire rated doors. 

I. Apply a steel astragal to meeting style of active leaf of pair of doors 
or double egress smoke doors. 

3.2 INSTALLATION OF DOORS APPLICATION OF HARDWARE 

 Install doors and hardware as specified in this Section. 

3.3 DOOR PROTECTION 

A. As door installation is completed, place polyethylene bag or cardboard 
shipping container over door and tape in place. 

B. Provide protective covering over knobs and handles in addition to 
covering door. 

C. Maintain covering in good condition until removal is approved by 
Contracting Officer Representative (COR). 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 08 31 13 
ACCESS DOORS AND FRAMES 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Section specifies access doors or panels. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Wire mesh and screen access doors: Section 05 50 00, METAL 
FABRICATIONS. 

B. Lock Cylinders: Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

C. Access doors in acoustical ceilings: Section 09 51 00, ACOUSTICAL 
CEILINGS. 

D. Locations of access doors for duct work cleanouts: Section 23 31 00, 
HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS Section 23 37 00, AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings: Access doors, each type, showing construction, location 
and installation details. 

C. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: Access doors, each type. 

1.4 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by basic 
designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-99(R-2009).........Stainless and Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel 
Steel Plate, Sheet and Strip 

A1008-10................Steel Sheet, Cold-Rolled, Carbon, Structural, 
High Strength Low-Alloy 

C. American Welding Society (AWS): 

D1.3-08.................Structural Welding Code Sheet Steel 

D. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

80-10...................Fire Doors and Windows 

E. The National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM): 

AMP 500 Series..........Metal Finishes Manual 

F. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

Fire Resistance Directory 

 


PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 FABRICATION, GENERAL 

A. Fabricate components to be straight, square, flat and in same plane 
where required. 

1. Slightly round exposed edges and without burrs, snags and sharp 
edges. 

2. Exposed welds continuous and ground smooth. 

3. Weld in accordance with AWS D1.3. 

B. Number of locks and non-continuous hinges as required to maintain 
alignment of panel with frame. 

C. Provide anchors or make provisions in frame for anchoring to adjacent 
construction. Provide size, number and location of anchors on four 
sides to secure access door in opening. 

2.2 ACCESS DOORS, FLUSH PANEL 

A. Door Panel: 

1. Form of 1.9 mm (0.0747 inch) thick galvanized steel sheet. 

2. Reinforce to maintain flat surface. 

B. Frame: 

1. Form of 1.5 mm (0.0598 inch) thick galvanized steel sheet of depth 
and configuration to suit material and type of construction where 
installed. 

2. Provide surface mounted units having frame flange at perimeter where 
installed in concrete, masonry, or gypsum board construction. 

3. Weld exposed joints in flange and grind smooth. 

4. Provide expanded galvanized metal lath perimeter wings when 
installed in plaster except veneer plaster. 

C. Hinge: 

1. Concealed spring hinge to allow panel to open 175 degrees. 

2. Provide removable hinge pin to allow removal of panel from frame. 

D. Lock: 

1. Flush, screwdriver operated cam lock. 

2.3 FINISH 

A. Provide in accordance with NAAMM AMP 500 series on exposed surfaces. 

B. Steel Surfaces: Baked-on prime coat over a protective phosphate 
coating. 

2.4 SIZE 

A. Minimum 600 mm (24 inches) square door unless otherwise shown and 
required to suit opening in suspension system of ceiling. 


PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 LOCATION 

A. Provide access panels or doors wherever any valves, traps, dampers, 
cleanouts, and other control items of mechanical, electrical and 
conveyor work are concealed in wall or partition, or are above ceiling 
of gypsum board or plaster. 

B. Use flush panels in partitions and gypsum board or plaster ceilings, 
except lay-in acoustical panel ceilings or upward access acoustical 
tile ceilings. 

3.2 INSTALLATION, GENERAL 

A. Install access doors in openings to have sides vertical in wall 
installations, and parallel to ceiling suspension grid or side walls 
when installed in ceiling. 

B. Set frames so that edge of frames without flanges will finish flush 
with surrounding finish surfaces. 

C. Set frames with flanges to overlap opening and so that face will be 
uniformly spaced from the finish surface. 

D. Set recessed panel access doors recessed so that face of surrounding 
materials will finish on the same plane, when finish in door is 
installed. 

3.3 ANCHORAGE 

A. Secure frames to adjacent construction using anchors attached to frames 
or by use of bolts or screws through the frame members. 

B. Type, size and number of anchoring device suitable for the material 
surrounding the opening, maintain alignment, and resist displacement 
during normal use of access door. 

C. Anchors for fire rated access doors shall meet requirements of 
applicable fire test. 

3.4 ADJUSTMENT 

A. Adjust hardware so that door panel will open freely. 

B. Adjust door when closed so door panel is centered in the frame. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 08 33 13 
COILING COUNTER DOORS 

PART 1 -GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Section specifies overhead roll up coiling shutters over counter in 
walls, including frame and counter. 

B. Electrical operation with back up crank operation. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Lock cylinder and keying: Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

B. Field Painting: Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

 Shutter, each type. 

 Installation procedures and instructions. 

C. Shop Drawings: 

 Shutter, each type, showing details of construction and installation. 

1.4 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in text by basic designation 
only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

B209-07.................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate 

B221-08.................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, 
Rods, Wire, Shapes, and Tubes 

F468-10.................Nonferrous Bolts, Hex Cap Screws, and Studs for 
General Use 

F593-02(R2008)..........Stainless Steel Bolts, Hex Cap Screws, and 
Studs 

C. American Welding Society (AWS): 

D1.2-08.................Structural Welding Code Aluminum 

D. National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM) 

AMP 500 Series-2006.....Metal Finishes Manual 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. Aluminum: 


1. Extruded: ASTM B221, alloy 6063-T5. 

2. Sheet: ASTM B209. 

2.2 FABRICATION 

A. Weld in accordance with AWS applicable code. 

B. Fire Rated Shutter: 

1. Integral counter, shutter, and frame type unit for installation with 
hood and fascia, sloping top, related accessories and components, 
and automation closing by fusible link. 

2. Comply with NFPA 80. The counter shall have Underwriters 
Laboratories Inc., or other nationally recognized laboratory label 
for Class B and C openings as shown. 

3. Construct for surface mounted and recessed installation. 

4. Construct of stainless steel on exposed to view components except 
counter. 

5. Counter: Minimum 2 mm (0.0747-inch) thick stainless steel with flush 
closed soffits and ends. 

6. Curtain: 

a. Flat type slats, approximately 32 mm (1 1/4-inches) wide. 

b. Bottom bar equipped with recessed flush handles, recessed slide 
bolt on one end, key operated cylinder lock on other end and a 
continuous flexible seal to make contact with counter. Lock 
cylinder specified in Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

7. Hood and Fascia: Steel Sheet, formed with beads or flanges to 
prevent deflection. 

8. Frame: Frame jamb sections to include guide slots for curtain with 
receiver for bolts and locks and continuous closure angles. 

9. Counterbalance Assembly: 

a. Spring barrel or shaft of steel pipe of sufficient strength to 
ensure deflection not exceeding 1 mm (0.03-inch) per 300 mm (1 
foot) of span. 

b. Barrel or shaft house oil-tempered, helically wound steel spring, 
and rotate on grease-sealed ball or roller-bearing units. 

c. Spring adjustable from outside. 

d. Brackets not less than 3 mm (0.125-inch) thick steel designed to 
form end closure support for head. 


10. Operation: 

a. Manual Push-up type for curtains less than 2130 mm (7-feet) wide. 
Crank operated for curtains over 2130 mm (7-feet) wide with 
automatic release when activated by fusible link. 

b. Equip shutter with an automatic closing device actuated by 
fusible link to release at 130 degrees F. located exposed below 
the ceiling on both sides of opening in accordance with NFPA No. 
80. 

 11. Sloping Top: 

a. Minimum 0.6 mm (0.0239-inch) thick steel fastened to hood with 
sheet metal screws. 

b. Exposed ends flush closures fastened as recommended by 
manufacturer. 

C. Non-Fire Rated Shutter: 

1. Integral shutter, and frame type unit for installation with hood and 
fascia, sloping top, and related accessories and components required 
for a complete working installation. 

2. Construct for surface mounted and/or recessed installation refer to 
drawings. 

3. Exposed to view components of same metal except as specified. 

4. Frame: Minimum 1.5 mm (0.0598-inch) thick stainless steel jamb 
sections formed to include guide slots for curtain with receiver for 
bolts and locks and continuous closure angles. 

5. Counterbalance Assembly: 

a. Spring barrel or shaft of steel pipe of sufficient strength to 
ensure deflection not exceeding 1 mm (0.03 inch) per 300 mm (1- 
foot) of span. 

b. Barrel or shaft house oil-tempered, helically wound steel spring, 
and rotate on grease-sealed ball or roller bearings. 

c. Springs adjustable from outside. 

6. Brackets: 3 mm (1/8-inch) thick steel plate designed to form end 
closure support for hood. 

7. Operation: Electric type with back up crank – provide a ligature 
resistant/security type of switch. 

8. Curtain: 

a. Flat type slats approximately 32 mm (1-1/4-inches) wide. 

b. Bottom bar, equipped with recessed flush handles, recessed slide 
bolts for locking on one end, key operated cylinder lock on other 


end, and a continuous flexible seal to make tight contact with 
counter. Lock cylinder specified in Section 08 71 00, DOOR 
HARDWARE. 

9. Aluminum Shutter: 

a. Curtain: Extruded aluminum, minimum 1.3 mm (0.050-inch) thick, 
with extruded aluminum bottom angle or bars. 

b. Sloping Top Hood and Fascia: Minimum 1 mm (0.040-inch) thick, 
sheet aluminum or 0.6 mm (0.0239-inch) thick stainless steel. 

c. Frames: Stainless steel. 

2.3 FINISH 

A. Aluminum: 

1. Finish in accordance with NAAMM AMP 500 and 501 or 504. 

2. Chemically etched medium matte, with clear anodic coating, AA-C- 
22A41. Class II Architectural, 0.06 mm (0.4 mils) thick (AMP 501). 
Class II Architectural, 0.06 mm (0.4 mils) thick. (AMP 501). 

B. Stainless Steel: Mechanical finish No. 4 in accordance with NAAMM AMP 
500 and AMP 503. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Install in accordance with approved shop drawings and manufacturer's 
instructions. 

B. Locate anchors and inserts for guides, brackets, supports, hardware, 
and other accessories and components accurately. 

C. Securely attach guides to adjoining construction with not less than 10 
mm (3/8-inch) diameter bolts, spaced near each end and not over 600 mm 
(24 inches) apart. 

1. Use fasteners conforming to ASTM F468 and F593. 

2. Use stainless steel bolts with aluminum or stainless steal. 

3. Use toggle bolts to frame walls or hollow masonry. 

3.2 REPAIR 

 Repair damaged zinc-coated surfaces by applying galvanized repair 
compound in accordance with the manufacturer's directions. 

3.3 PROTECTION 

A. Isolate aluminum in contact with or fastened to dissimilar metal other 
than stainless steel, white bronze or other metals compatible with 
aluminum by painting the dissimilar or aluminum with a coat of TT-P-645 
primer, or by placing an approved caulking compound, or a nonabsorptive 
tape, or gasket between the aluminum and dissimilar metal. 


3.4 ADJUSTING AND CLEANING 

A. Lubricate properly, adjust and demonstrate, to operate freely and as 
specified. 

B. Clean upon completion. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 08 41 13 
ALUMINUM-FRAMED ENTRANCES AND STOREFRONTS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION: 

A. This section specifies aluminum entrance work including storefront 
construction, storefront doors, and other components to make a complete 
assembly. 

1.2 RELATED WORK: 

A. Glass and Glazing: Section 08 80 00, GLAZING. 

B. Hardware: Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

C. Texture and color of finish: As indicated in drawings. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS: 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings: (1/2 full scale) showing construction, anchorage, 
reinforcement, and installation details. 

C. Manufacturer’s Literature and Data: 

1. Doors, each type. 

2. Entrance and Storefront construction. 

D. Samples: 

1. Two samples of organic finish of each color specified. 

E. Manufacturer's Certificates: 

1. Indicating manufacturer's qualifications specified. 

F. Door and Window AT/FP Blast and Hurricane Large/Small Missile Impact 
Tested Assemblies: 

1. Test data demonstrating compliance AT/FP blast testing and Hurricane 
Large/Small Missile Impact Testing, with statement by a registered 
structural engineer indicating the tested window systems meet or 
exceed these requirements. 

 G. Calculations: 

 1. Engineering calculations of wind pressures and statement indicating 
window systems being installed meet or exceed the wind pressures. 
Calculations shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered 
structural engineer. 

1.4 QUALITY ASSURANCE: 

A. Approval by Contracting Officer is required of products of proposed 
manufacturer, or supplier, and will be based upon submission by 
Contractor certification. 


B. Certify manufacturer regularly and presently manufactures aluminum 
entrances and storefronts as one of their principal products. 

1.5 DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING: 

A. Deliver aluminum entrance and storefront material to the site in 
packages or containers; labeled for identification with the 
manufacturer's name, brand and contents. 

B. Store aluminum entrance and storefront material in weather-tight and 
dry storage facility. 

C. Protect from damage from handling, weather and construction operations 
before, during and after installation. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS: 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

B209-07.................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate 

B221-08.................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, 
Rods, Wire, Shapes, and Tubes 

E283-04.................Rate of Air Leakage Through Exterior Windows, 
Curtain Walls, and Doors Under Specified 
Pressure Differences Across the Specimen 

E331-00(R2009)..........Water Penetration of Exterior Windows, Curtain 
Walls, and Doors by Uniform Static Air Pressure 
Difference 

F468-10.................Nonferrous Bolts, Hex Cap Screws, and Studs for 
General Use 

F593-02(R2008)..........Stainless Steel Bolts, Hex Cap Screws, and 
Studs 

C. National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM): 

AMP 500 Series..........Metal Finishes Manual 

D. American Architectural Manufacturer's Association (AAMA): 

2604-10.................High Performance Organic Coatings on 
Architectural Aluminum Extrusions and Panels 

E. American Welding Society (AWS): 

D1.2-08.................Structural Welding Code Aluminum 

1.7 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS: 

A. Wind Pressures: Shapes and thickness of framing members shall be 
sufficient to withstand the design wind load pressures based on the 


criteria indicated on the structural drawings of supported area with a 
deflection of not more than 1/175 times the length of the member and a 
safety factor of not less than 1.65 (applied to overall load failure of 
the unit). Provide glazing beads, moldings, and trim of not less than 
1.25 mm (0.050 inch) nominal thickness. 

B. Air Infiltration: When tested in accordance with ASTM E 283, air 
infiltration shall not exceed 2.63 x 10-50 cm per square meter (0.06 
cubic feet per minute per square foot) of fixed area at a test pressure 
of 0.30 kPa (6.24 pounds per square foot) 80 kilometers (50 mile) per 
hour wind. 

C. Water Penetration: When tested in accordance with ASTM E 331, there 
shall be no water penetration at a pressure of 0.38 kPa (8 pounds per 
square foot) of fixed area. 

 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS: 

A. Aluminum, ASTM B209 and B221: 

1. Alloy 6063 temper T5 for doors, door frames, fixed glass sidelights, 
storefronts, and transoms. 

2. Alloy 6061 temper T6 for guide tracks for sliding doors and other 
extruded structural members. 

3. For color anodized finish, use aluminum alloy as required to produce 
specified color. 

 B. Thermal Break: Manufacturer standard low conductive material retarding 
heat flow in the framework, where insulating glass is scheduled. 

C. Fasteners: 

1. Aluminum: ASTM F468, Alloy 2024. 

2. Stainless Steel: ASTM F593, Alloy Groups 1, 2 and 3. 

2.2 FABRICATION: 

A. Fabricate doors, of extruded aluminum sections not less than 3 mm 
(0.125 inch) thick. Fabricate glazing beads of aluminum not less than 
1.0 mm (0.050 inch) thick. 

B. Accurately form metal parts and accurately fit and rigidly assemble 
joints, except those joints designed to accommodate movement. Seal 
joints to prevent leakage of both air and water. 

C. Make welds in aluminum in accordance with the recommended practice AWA 
D1.2. Use electrodes and methods recommended by the manufacturers of 
the metals and alloys being welded. Make welds behind finished surfaces 


so as to cause no distortion or discoloration of the exposed side. 
Clean welded joints of welding flux and dress exposed and contact 
surfaces. 

D. Make provisions in doors and frames to receive the specified hardware 
and accessories. Coordinate schedule and template for hardware 
specified under Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. Where concealed 
closers or other mechanisms are required, provide the necessary space, 
cutouts, and reinforcement for secure fastening. 

E. Fit and assemble the work at the manufacturer's plant. Mark work that 
cannot be permanently plant-assembled to assure proper assembly in the 
field. 

2.3 PROTECTION OF ALUMINUM: 

A. Isolate aluminum from contact with dissimilar metals other than 
stainless steel, white bronze, or zinc by any of the following: 

1. Coat the dissimilar metal with two coats of heavy-bodied alkali 
resistant bituminous paint. 

2. Place caulking compound, or non-absorptive tape, or gasket between 
the aluminum and the dissimilar metal. 

3. Paint aluminum in contact with mortar, concrete and plaster, with a 
coat of aluminum paint primer. 

2.4 FRAMES: 

A. Fabricate doors, frames, mullions, transoms, frames for fixed glass and 
similar members from extruded aluminum not less than 3 mm (0.125 inch) 
thick. 

B. Provide integral stops and glass rebates and applied snap-on type trim. 

C. Use concealed screws, bolts and other fasteners. Secure cover boxes to 
frames in back of all lock strike cutouts. 

D. Fabricate framework with thermal breaks in frames where insulating 
glass is scheduled and specified under Section 08 80 00, GLAZING. 

2.5 STILE AND RAIL DOORS: 

A. Nominal 45 mm (1-3/4 inch) thick, with stile and head rail 90 mm (3-1/2 
inches) wide, and bottom rail 250 mm (10 inches) wide. 

B. Bevel single-acting doors 3 mm (1/8 inch) at lock, hinge and meeting 
stile edges. Provide clearances of 2 mm (1/16 inch) at hinge stiles, 3 
mm (1/8 inch) at lock stiles and top rails, and 5 mm (3/16 inch) at 
floors and thresholds. Form glass rebates integrally with stiles and 
rails. Glazing beads may be formed integrally with stiles and rails or 
applied type secured with fasteners at 150 mm (six inches) on centers. 


C. Construct doors with a system of welded joints or interlocking dovetail 
joints between stiles and rails. Clamp door together through top and 
bottom rails with 9 mm (3/8 inch) primed steel rod extending into the 
stiles, and having a self-locking nut and washer at each end. Reinforce 
stiles and rails to prevent door distortion when tie rods are 
tightened. Provide a compensating spring-type washer under each nut to 
take up any stresses that may develop. Construct joints between rails 
and stiles to remain rigid and tight when door is operated. 

D. Weather-stripping: Provide removable, woven pile type (siliconetreated) 
weather-stripping attached to aluminum or vinyl holder. Make 
slots for applying weather-stripping integral with doors and door frame 
stops. Apply continuous weather-stripping to heads, jambs, bottom, and 
meeting stiles of doors and frames. Install weather-stripping so doors 
can swing freely and close positively. 

2.6 REINFORCEMENT FOR BUILDERS HARDWARE: 

A. Fabricate from stainless steel plates. 

B. Hinge and pivot reinforcing: 4.55 mm (0.1793 inch) thick. 

C. Reinforcing for lock face, flush bolts, concealed holders, concealed or 
surface mounted closers: 2.66 mm (0.1046 inch) thick. 

D. Reinforcing for all other surface mounted hardware: 1.5 mm (0.0598 
inch) thick. 

2.7 COLUMN COVERS AND TRIM 

A. Fabricate column covers and trim shown from 1.5 mm (0.0625 inch) thick 
sheet aluminum of longest available lengths. 

B. Use concealed fasteners. 

C. Provide aluminum stiffener and other supporting members shown or as 
required to maintain the integrity of the components. 

2.8 FINISH 

A. In accordance with NAAMM AMP 500 series. 

B. Fluorocarbon Finish: AAMA 605.2, high performance coating. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION: 

A. Allowable Installation Tolerances: Install work plumb and true, in 
alignment and in relation to lines and grades shown. Variation of 3 mm 
(1/8 inch) in 2400 mm (eight feet), non-accumulative, is maximum 
permissible for plumb, level, warp, bow and alignment. 

B. Anchor aluminum frames to adjoining construction at heads, jambs and 
bottom and to steel supports, and bracing. Anchor frames with stainless 


steel countersunk flathead, expansion bolts, or machine screws, or 
other type fasteners required to meet impact testing and blast testing 
requirements. Use aluminum clips for internal connections of adjoining 
frame sections. 

C. Where work is installed within masonry or concrete openings, place no 
parts other than built-in anchors and provision for operating devices 
located in the floor, until after the masonry or concrete work is 
completed. 

D. Install hardware specified under Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

3.2 ADJUSTING: 

A. After installation of entrance and storefront work is completed, adjust 
and lubricate operating mechanisms to insure proper performance. 

3.3 PROTECTION, CLEANING AND REPAIRING: 

A. Remove all mastic smears and other unsightly marks, and repair any 
damaged or disfiguration of the work. Protect the installed work 
against damage or abuse. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 08 71 00 
DOOR HARDWARE 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Door hardware and related items necessary for complete installation and 
operation of doors. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Caulking: Section 07 92 00 JOINT SEALANTS. 

B. Application of Hardware: Section 08 14 00, INTERIOR WOOD DOORS, Section 
08 11 13, HOLLOW METAL DOORS AND FRAMES, Section 08 17 10, INTEGRATED 
DOOR ASSEMBLIES, Section 13 49 00, RADIATION PROTECTION 

C. Finishes: As indicated on drawings. 

D. Painting: Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

E. Electrical: Division 26, ELECTRICAL. 

F. Fire Detection: Section 28 31 00, FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM. 

1.3 GENERAL 

A. All hardware shall comply with UFAS, (Uniform Federal Accessible 
Standards) unless specified otherwise. 

B. Provide rated door hardware assemblies where required by most current 
version of the International Building Code (IBC). 

C. Hardware for Labeled Fire Doors and Exit Doors: Conform to requirements 
of NFPA 80 for labeled fire doors and to NFPA 101 for exit doors, as 
well as to other requirements specified. Provide hardware listed by UL, 
except where heavier materials, large size, or better grades are 
specified herein under paragraph HARDWARE SETS. In lieu of UL labeling 
and listing, test reports from a nationally recognized testing agency 
may be submitted showing that hardware has been tested in accordance 
with UL test methods and that it conforms to NFPA requirements. 

D. Hardware for application on metal and wood doors and frames shall be 
made to standard templates. Furnish templates to the fabricator of 
these items in sufficient time so as not to delay the construction. 

E. The following items shall be of the same manufacturer, except as 
otherwise specified: 

1. Mortise locksets. 

2. Hinges for hollow metal and wood doors. 

3. Surface applied overhead door closers. 

4. Exit devices. 

5. Floor closers. 


1.4 WARRANTY 

A. Automatic door operators shall be subject to the terms of FAR Clause 
52.246-21, except that the Warranty period shall be two years in lieu 
of one year for all items except as noted below: 

1. Locks, latchsets, and panic hardware: 5 years. 

2. Door closers and continuous hinges: 10 years. 

1.5 MAINTENANCE MANUALS 

A. In accordance with Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS Article 
titled "INSTRUCTIONS", furnish maintenance manuals and instructions on 
all door hardware. Provide installation instructions with the submittal 
documentation. 

1.6 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submittals shall be in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, 
PRODUCT DATA AND SAMPLES. Submit 6 copies of the schedule per Section 
01 33 23. Submit 2 final copies of the final approved schedules to VAMC 
Locksmith as record copies (VISN Locksmith if the VAMC does not have a 
locksmith). 

B. Hardware Schedule: Prepare and submit hardware schedule in the 
following form: 

Hardware 
Item 

Quantity 

Size 

Reference 
Publication 
Type No. 

Finish 

Mfr. 
Name 
and 
Catalog 
No. 

Key 
Control 
Symbols 

UL Mark 
(if 
fire 
rated 
and 
listed) 

ANSI/BHMA 
Finish 
Designation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

C. Samples and Manufacturers' Literature: 

1. Samples: All hardware items (proposed for the project) that have not 
been previously approved by Builders Hardware Manufacturers 
Association shall be submitted for approval. Tag and mark all items 
with manufacturer's name, catalog number and project number. 

2. Samples are not required for hardware listed in the specifications 
by manufacturer's catalog number, if the contractor proposes to use 
the manufacturer's product specified. 

D. Certificate of Compliance and Test Reports: Submit certificates that 
hardware conforms to the requirements specified herein. Certificates 


shall be accompanied by copies of reports as referenced. The testing 
shall have been conducted either in the manufacturer's plant and 
certified by an independent testing laboratory or conducted in an 
independent laboratory, within four years of submittal of reports for 
approval. 

1.7 DELIVERY AND MARKING 

A. Deliver items of hardware to job site in their original containers, 
complete with necessary appurtenances including screws, keys, and 
instructions. Tag one of each different item of hardware and deliver to 
Contracting Officer Representative (COR) for reference purposes. Tag 
shall identify items by Project Specification number and manufacturer's 
catalog number. These items shall remain on file in Contracting Officer 
Representative (COR)'s office until all other similar items have been 
installed in project, at which time the Contracting Officer 
Representative (COR) will deliver items on file to Contractor for 
installation in predetermined locations on the project. 

1.8 PREINSTALLATION MEETING 

A. Convene a preinstallation meeting not less than 30 days before start of 
installation of door hardware. Require attendance of parties directly 
affecting work of this section, including Contractor and Installer, 
Architect, Project Engineer and VA Locksmith, Hardware Consultant, and 
Hardware Manufacturer’s Representative. Review the following: 

1. Inspection of door hardware. 

2. Job and surface readiness. 

3. Coordination with other work. 

4. Protection of hardware surfaces. 

5. Substrate surface protection. 

6. Installation. 

7. Adjusting. 

8. Repair. 

9. Field quality control. 

10. Cleaning. 

1.9 INSTRUCTIONS 

A. Hardware Set Symbols on Drawings: Except for protective plates, door 
stops, mutes, thresholds and the like specified herein, hardware 
requirements for each door are indicated on drawings by symbols. 
Symbols for hardware sets consist of letters (e.g., "HW") followed by a 


number. Each number designates a set of hardware items applicable to a 
door type. 

 B. Keying: All cylinders shall be keyed into existing System: as indicated 
by Contracting Officer Representative (COR). Provide removable core 
cylinders that are removable only with a special key or tool without 
disassembly of knob or lockset. Cylinders shall match facility 
standard. Keying information shall be furnished at a later date by the 
Contracting Officer Representative (COR). 

1.10 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. In text, hardware items are referred to by 
series, types, etc., listed in such specifications and standards, 
except as otherwise specified. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

F883-04.................Padlocks 

E2180-07................Standard Test Method for Determining the 
Activity of Incorporated Antimicrobial Agent(s) 
In Polymeric or Hydrophobic Materials 

C. American National Standards Institute/Builders Hardware Manufacturers 
Association (ANSI/BHMA): 

A156.1-06...............Butts and Hinges 

A156.2-03...............Bored and Pre-assembled Locks and Latches 

A156.3-08...............Exit Devices, Coordinators, and Auto Flush 
Bolts 

A156.4-08...............Door Controls (Closers) 

A156.5-01...............Auxiliary Locks and Associated Products 

A156.6-05...............Architectural Door Trim 

A156.8-05...............Door Controls-Overhead Stops and Holders 

A156.12-05 .............Interconnected Locks and Latches 

A156.13-05..............Mortise Locks and Latches Series 1000 

A156.14-07 .............Sliding and Folding Door Hardware 

A156.15-06..............Release Devices-Closer Holder, Electromagnetic 
and Electromechanical 

A156.16-08..............Auxiliary Hardware 

A156.17-04 .............Self-Closing Hinges and Pivots 

A156.18-06..............Materials and Finishes 

A156.20-06 .............Strap and Tee Hinges, and Hasps 


A156.21-09..............Thresholds 

A156.22-05..............Door Gasketing and Edge Seal Systems 

A156.23-04..............Electromagnetic Locks 

A156.24-03..............Delayed Egress Locking Systems 

A156.25-07 .............Electrified Locking Devices 

A156.26-06..............Continuous Hinges 

A156.28-07 .............Master Keying Systems 

A156.29-07 .............Exit Locks and Alarms 

A156.30-03 .............High Security Cylinders 

A156.31-07 .............Electric Strikes and Frame Mounted Actuators 

A250.8-03...............Standard Steel Doors and Frames 

D. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

80-10...................Fire Doors and Fire Windows 

101-09..................Life Safety Code 

E. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

 Building Materials Directory (2008) 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 BUTT HINGES 

A. ANSI A156.1. Provide only three-knuckle hinges, except five-knuckle 
where the required hinge type is not available in a three-knuckle 
version (e.g., some types of swing-clear hinges). The following types 
of butt hinges shall be used for the types of doors listed, except 
where otherwise specified: 

1. Exterior Doors: Type A2112/A5112 for doors 900 mm (3 feet) wide or 
less and Type A2111/A5111 for doors over 900 mm (3 feet) wide. 
Hinges for exterior outswing doors shall have non-removable pins. 
Hinges for exterior fire-rated doors shall be of stainless steel 
material. 

2. Interior Doors: Type A8112/A5112 for doors 900 mm (3 feet) wide or 
less and Type A8111/A5111 for doors over 900 mm (3 feet) wide. 
Hinges for doors exposed to high humidity areas (shower rooms, 
toilet rooms, kitchens, janitor rooms, etc. shall be of stainless 
steel material. 

B. Provide quantity and size of hinges per door leaf as follows: 

1. Doors up to 1210 mm (4 feet) high: 2 hinges. 
2. Doors 1210 mm (4 feet) to 2260 mm (7 feet 5 inches) high: 3 hinges 
minimum. 
3. Doors greater than 2260 mm (7 feet 5 inches) high: 4 hinges. 



4. Doors up to 900 mm (3 feet) wide, standard weight: 114 mm x 114 mm 
(4-1/2 inches x 4-1/2 inches) hinges. 
5. Doors over 900 mm (3 feet) to 1065 mm (3 feet 6 inches) wide, 
standard weight: 127 mm x 114 mm (5 inches x 4-1/2 inches). 
6. Doors over 1065 mm (3 feet 6 inches) to 1210 mm (4 feet), heavy 
weight: 127 mm x 114 mm (5 inches x 4-1/2 inches). 
7. Provide heavy-weight hinges where specified. 
8. At doors weighing 330 kg (150 lbs.) or more, furnish 127 mm (5 inch) 
high hinges. 


C. See Articles "MISCELLANEOUS HARDWARE" and "HARDWARE SETS" for pivots 
and hinges other than butts specified above and continuous hinges 
specified below. 

2.2 CONTINUOUS HINGES 

A. ANSI/BHMA A156.26, Grade 1-600. 

1. Listed under Category N in BHMA's "Certified Product Directory." 

B. General: Minimum 0.120-inch- (3.0-mm-) thick, hinge leaves with 
minimum overall width of 4 inches (102 mm); fabricated to full height 
of door and frame and to template screw locations; with components 
finished after milling and drilling are complete 

C. Continuous, Barrel-Type Hinges: Hinge with knuckles formed around a 
Teflon-coated 6.35mm (0.25-inch) minimum diameter pin that extends 
entire length of hinge. 

1. Base Metal for Exterior Hinges: Stainless steel. 

2. Base Metal for Interior Hinges: Steel. 

3. Base Metal for Hinges for Fire-Rated Assemblies: Steel. 

4. Provide with non-removable pin (hospital tip option) at lockable 
outswing doors. 

5. Where required to clear adjacent casing, trim, and wall conditions 
and allow full door swing, provide wide throw hinges of minimum 
width required. 

6. Provide with manufacturer’s cut-outs for separate mortised power 
transfers and/or mortised automatic door bottoms where they occur. 

7. Where thru-wire power transfers are integral to the hinge, provide 
hinge with easily removable portion to allow easy access to wiring 
connections. 

8. Where models are specified that provide an integral wrap-around edge 
guard for the hinge edge of the door, provide manufacturer’s 


adjustable threaded stud and machine screw mechanism to allow the 
door to be adjusted within the wrap-around edge guard. 

2.3 DOOR CLOSING DEVICES 

A. Closing devices shall be products of one manufacturer. 

2.4 OVERHEAD CLOSERS 

A. Conform to ANSI A156.4, Grade 1. 

B. Closers shall conform to the following: 

1. The closer shall have minimum 50 percent adjustable closing force 
over minimum value for that closer and have adjustable hydraulic 
back check effective between 60 degrees and 85 degrees of door 
opening. 

2. Where specified, closer shall have hold-open feature. 

3. Size Requirements: Provide multi-size closers, sizes 1 through 6, 
except where multi-size closer is not available for the required 
application. 

4. Material of closer body shall be forged or cast. 

5. Arm and brackets for closers shall be steel, malleable iron or high 
strength ductile cast iron. 

6. Where closers are exposed to the exterior or are mounted in rooms 
that experience high humidity, provide closer body and arm assembly 
of stainless steel material. 

7. Closers shall have full size metal cover; plastic covers will not be 
accepted. 

8. Closers shall have adjustable hydraulic back-check, separate valves 
for closing and latching speed, adjustable back-check positioning 
valve, and adjustable delayed action valve. 

9. Provide closers with any accessories required for the mounting 
application, including (but not limited to) drop plates, special 
soffit plates, spacers for heavy-duty parallel arm fifth screws, 
bull-nose or other regular arm brackets, longer or shorter arm 
assemblies, and special factory templating. Provide special arms, 
drop plates, and templating as needed to allow mounting at doors 
with overhead stops and/or holders. 

10. Closer arms or backcheck valve shall not be used to stop the door 
from overswing, except in applications where a separate wall, floor, 
or overhead stop cannot be used. 

11. Provide parallel arm closers with heavy duty rigid arm. 


12. Where closers are to be installed on the push side of the door, 
provide parallel arm type except where conditions require use of top 
jamb arm. 

13. Provide all surface closers with the same body attachment screw 
pattern for ease of replacement and maintenance. 

14. All closers shall have a 1 ½” (38mm) minimum piston diameter. 

2.5 FLOOR CLOSERS AND FLOOR PIVOT SETS 

A. Comply with ANSI A156.4. Provide stainless steel floor plates for floor 
closers and floor pivots, except where metal thresholds occur. Provide 
cement case for all floor closers. Floor closers specified for fire 
doors shall comply with Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., requirements 
for concealed type floor closers for classes of fire doors indicated on 
drawings. Hold-open mechanism, where required, shall engage when door 
is opened 105 degrees, except when door swing is limited by building 
construction or equipment, the hold-open feature shall engage when door 
is opened approximately 90 degrees. The hold-open mechanism shall be 
selectable on/off by turning a screw through the floor plate. Floor 
closers shall have adjustable hydraulic back-check, adjustable close 
speed, and adjustable latch speed. Provide closers with delayed action 
where a hold-open mechanism is not required. Floor closers shall be 
multi-sized. Single acting floor closers shall also have built in dead 
stop. Where required, provide closers with special cement cases 
appropriate for shallow deck installation or where concrete joint lines 
run through the floor blockout. At offset-hung doors installed in deep 
reveals, provide special closer arm and spindle to allow for 
installation. Where stone or terrazzo is applied over the floor closer 
case, provide closer without floor plate and with extended spindle 
(length as required) and special cover pan (depth as required) to allow 
closer to be accessed without damaging the material applied over the 
closer. Pivots for non-labeled doors shall be cast, forged or extruded 
brass or bronze. 

B. Where floor closer appears in hardware set provide the following as 
applicable. 

1. Double Acting Floor Closers: Type C06012. 

2. Single Acting Floor Closer: Type C06021 (center pivoted). 
(Intermediate pivot is not required). 

3. Single Acting Floor Closers: Type C06041 (offset pivoted). 


4. Single Acting Floor Closer for Labeled Fire Doors: Type C06051 
(offset pivoted). 

5. Single Acting Floor Closers For Lead Lined Doors: Type C06071 
(offset pivoted). 

2.6 DOOR STOPS 

A. Conform to ANSI A156.16. 

B. Provide door stops wherever an opened door or any item of hardware 
thereon would strike a wall, column, equipment or other parts of 
building construction. For concrete, masonry or quarry tile 
construction, use lead expansion shields for mounting door stops. 

C. Where cylindrical locks with turn pieces or pushbuttons occur, equip 
wall bumpers Type L02251 (rubber pads having concave face) to receive 
turn piece or button. 

D. Provide floor stops (Type L02141 or L02161 in office areas; Type L02121 
x 3 screws into floor elsewhere. Wall bumpers, where used, must be 
installed to impact the trim or the door within the leading half of its 
width. Floor stops, where used, must be installed within 4-inches of 
the wall face and impact the door within the leading half of its width. 

E. Where drywall partitions occur, use floor stops, Type L02141 or L02161 
in office areas, Type L02121 elsewhere. 

F. Provide stop Type L02011, as applicable for exterior doors. At 
outswing doors where stop can be installed in concrete, provide stop 
mated to concrete anchor set in 76mm (3-inch) core-drilled hole and 
filled with quick-setting cement. 

G. Omit stops where floor mounted door holders are required and where 
automatic operated doors occur. 

H. Provide appropriate roller bumper for each set of doors (except where 
closet doors occur) where two doors would interfere with each other in 
swinging. 

I. Provide appropriate door mounted stop on doors in individual toilets 
where floor or wall mounted stops cannot be used. 

K. Provide door stops on doors where combination closer magnetic holders 
are specified, except where wall stops cannot be used or where floor 
stops cannot be installed within 4-inches of the wall. 

L. Where the specified wall or floor stop cannot be used, provide 
concealed overhead stops (surface-mounted where concealed cannot be 
used). 


2.7 OVERHEAD DOOR STOPS AND HOLDERS 

A. Conform to ANSI Standard A156.8. Overhead holders shall be of sizes 
recommended by holder manufacturer for each width of door. Set overhead 
holders for 110 degree opening, unless limited by building construction 
or equipment. Provide Grade 1 overhead concealed slide type: stop-only 
at rated doors and security doors, hold-open type with exposed holdopen 
on/off control at all other doors requiring overhead door stops. 

2.8 FLOOR DOOR HOLDERS 

A. Conform to ANSI Standard A156.16. Provide extension strikes for Types 
L01301 and L01311 holders where necessary. 

2.9 LOCKS AND LATCHES 

A. Conform to ANSI A156.2. Locks and latches for doors 45 mm (1-3/4 inch) 
thick or over shall have beveled fronts. Lock cylinders shall have not 
less than seven pins. Match facility standards. Cylinders for all 
locksets shall be removable core type. Cylinders shall be furnished 
with construction removable cores using a “TB” keyway and construction 
master keys. Cylinder shall be removable by special key or tool. 
Construct all cores so that they will be interchangeable into the core 
housings of all mortise locks, rim locks, cylindrical locks, and any 
other type lock included in the Great Grand Master Key System. 
Disassembly of lever or lockset shall not be required to remove core 
from lockset. All locksets or latches on double doors with fire label 
shall have latch bolt with 19 mm (3/4 inch) throw, unless shorter throw 
allowed by the door manufacturer’s fire label. Provide temporary keying 
device or construction core of allow opening and closing during 
construction and prior to the installation of final cores. 

B. In addition to above requirements, locks and latches shall comply with 
following requirements: 

1. Mortise Lock and Latch Sets: Best Mortise 45H7 15R626 only. 

2. Cylindrical Lock and Latch Sets: levers shall meet ADA (Americans 
with Disabilities Act) requirements. Cylindrical locksets shall be 
series 4000 Grade I. All locks and latchsets shall be furnished with 
122.55 mm (4-7/8-inch) curved lip strike and wrought box. At 
outswing pairs with overlapping astragals, provide flat lip strip 
with 21mm (7/8-inch) lip-to-center dimension. Provide lever design 
to match design selected by Architect or to match existing lever 
design. Where two turn pieces are specified for lock F76, turn 
piece on inside knob shall lock and unlock inside knob, and turn 


piece on outside knob shall unlock outside knob when inside knob is 
in the locked position. (This function is intended to allow 
emergency entry into these rooms without an emergency key or any 
special tool.) 

3. Auxiliary locks shall be as specified under hardware sets and 
conform to ANSI A156.5. 

4. Locks on designated doors in Psychiatric (Mental Health) areas shall 
be paddle type with arrow projection covers and be UL Listed. 
Provide these locks with paddle in the down position on both sides 
of the door. Locks shall be fabricated of wrought stainless steel. 

5. Privacy locks in non-mental-health patient rooms shall have an 
inside thumbturn for privacy and an outside thumbturn for emergency 
entrance. Single occupancy patient privacy doors shall typically 
swing out; where such doors cannot swing out, provide center-pivoted 
doors with rescue hardware (see HW-2B). 

2.10 PUSH-BUTTON COMBINATION LOCKS 

A. ANSI/BHMA A156.13, Grade 1. Battery operated pushbutton entry. 

B. Construction: Heavy duty mortise lock housing conforming to ANSI/BHMA 
A156.13, Grade 1. Lever handles and operating components in compliance 
with the UFAS and the ADA Accessibility Guidelines. Match lever 
handles of locks and latchsets on adjacent doors. 

C. Special Features: Key override to permit a master keyed security 
system and a pushbutton security code activated passage feature to 
allow access without using the entry code. 

2.11 ELECTROMAGNETIC LOCKS 

A. ANSI/BHMA A156.23; electrically powered, of strength and configuration 
indicated; with electromagnet attached to frame and armature plate 
attached to door. Listed under Category E in BHMA's "Certified Product 
Directory." 

1. Type: Full exterior or full interior, as required by application 
indicated. 

2. Strength Ranking: 1500 lbf (6672 N). 

3. Inductive Kickback Peak Voltage: Not more than 0 V. 

4. Residual Magnetism: Not more than 0 lbf (0 N) to separate door from 
magnet. 

B. Delayed-Egress Locks: BHMA A156.24. Listed under Category G in BHMA's 
"Certified Product Directory". 


1. Means of Egress Doors: Lock releases within 15 seconds after 
applying a force not more than 15 lbf (67 N) for not more than 3 
seconds, as required by NFPA 101. 

2. Security Grade: Activated from secure side of door by initiating 
device. 

3. Movement Grade: Activated by door movement as initiating device. 

4. The lock housing shall not project more than 4-inches (101mm) from 
the underside of the frame head stop. 

2.12 ELECTRIC STRIKES 

A. ANSI/ BHMA A156.31 Grade 1. 

B. General: Use fail-secure electric strikes at fire-rated doors. 

2.13 KEYS 

A. Stamp all keys with change number and key set symbol. Furnish keys in 
quantities as follows: 

Locks/Keys 

Quantity 

Cylinder locks 

2 keys each 

Cylinder lock change key 
blanks 

100 each different key way 

Master-keyed sets 

6 keys each 

Grand Master sets 

6 keys each 

Great Grand Master set 

5 keys 

Control key 

2 keys 



 

B. Psychiatric keys shall be cut so that first two bittings closest to the 
key shoulder are shallow to provide greater strength at point of 
greatest torque. 

2.14 KEY CABINET 

A. ANSI Standard A156.5. Provide key cabinet made of cold rolled, 1.2 mm 
(0.0478 inch) thick furniture steel electro-welded. Doors shall have 
"no sag" continuous brass-pin piano type hinge and be equipped with 
chrome plated locking door handles, hook cam and mechanical pushbutton 
door lock. Key Cabinet and Key Control System shall accommodate all 
keys for this project plus 25 percent. Provide minimum number of 
multiple cabinets where a single cabinet of largest size will not 
accommodate the required number of keys. 

B. Key tags shall consist of two sets: Permanent self-locking and loan key 
snaphook type with tag colors as follows: Red fiber marker of the 
permanent self-locking type approximately 32 mm (1-1/4 inch) in 


diameter engraved with the legend "FILE KEY MUST NOT BE LOANED." Also 
furnish for each hook a white cloverleaf key marker with snap-hooks 
engraved with the legend "LOAN KEY." 

C. The manufacturer of the lock cylinders and locks shall attach a key tag 
to keys of each lock cylinder and shall mark thereon the respective 
item number and key change number. Provide each group of keys in a key 
gathering envelope (supplied by Key Cabinet Manufacturer) in which the 
lock manufacturer shall include the following information: Item number, 
key change number and door number. The contractor shall furnish the Key 
Cabinet Manufacturer the hardware and keying schedules and change keys. 

D. The Key Cabinet Manufacturer shall set up a three-way cross index 
system, including master keys, listing the keys alphabetically, the 
hooks numerically and the key changes numerically on different colored 
index cards. Index cards shall be typewritten and inserted in a durable 
binder. Attach the keys to the two sets of numbered tags supplied with 
the cabinet. (The permanent tag and the loan key tag). Instruct the 
owner in proper use of the system. Install cabinet as directed by the 
Contracting Officer Representative (COR). 

2.15 ARMOR PLATES, KICK PLATES, MOP PLATES AND DOOR EDGING 

A. Conform to ANSI Standard A156.6. 

B. Provide protective plates and door edging as specified below: 

1. Kick plates, mop plates and armor plates of metal, Type J100 series. 

2. Provide kick plates and mop plates where specified. Kick plates 
shall be 254 mm (10 inches) or 305 mm (12 inches) high. Mop plates 
shall be 152 mm (6 inches) high. Both kick and mop plates shall be 
minimum 1.27 mm (0.050 inches) thick. Provide kick and mop plates 
beveled on all 4 edges (B4E). On push side of doors where jamb stop 
extends to floor, make kick plates 38 mm (1-1/2 inches) less than 
width of door, except pairs of metal doors which shall have plates 
25 mm (1 inch) less than width of each door. Extend all other kick 
and mop plates to within 6 mm (1/4 inch) of each edge of doors. Kick 
and mop plates shall butt astragals. For jamb stop requirements, see 
specification sections pertaining to door frames. 

3. Kick plates and/or mop plates are not required on following door 
sides: 

a. Armor plate side of doors; 

b. Exterior side of exterior doors; 

c. Closet side of closet doors; 


d. Both sides of aluminum entrance doors. 

4. Armor plates for doors are listed under Article "Hardware Sets". 
Armor plates shall be thickness as noted in the hardware set, 875 mm 
(35 inches) high and 38 mm (1-1/2 inches) less than width of doors, 
except on pairs of metal doors. Provide armor plates beveled on all 
4 edges (B4E). Plates on pairs of metal doors shall be 25 mm (1 
inch) less than width of each door. Where top of intermediate rail 
of door is less than 875 mm (35 inches) from door bottom, extend 
armor plates to within 13 mm (1/2 inch) of top of intermediate rail. 
On doors equipped with panic devices, extend armor plates to within 
13 mm (1/2 inch) of panic bolt push bar. 

5. Where louver or grille occurs in lower portion of doors, substitute 
stretcher plate and kick plate in place of armor plate. Size of 
stretcher plate and kick plate shall be 254 mm (10 inches) high. 

6. Provide stainless steel edge guards where so specified at wood 
doors. Provide mortised type instead of surface type except where 
door construction and/or ratings will not allow. Provide edge 
guards of bevel and thickness to match wood door. Provide edge 
guards with factory cut-outs for door hardware that must be 
installed through or extend through the edge guard. Provide fullheight 
edge guards except where door rating does not allow; in such 
cases, provide edge guards to height of bottom of typical lockset 
armor front. Forward edge guards to wood door manufacturer for 
factory installation on doors. 

2.16 EXIT DEVICES 

A. Conform to ANSI Standard A156.3. Exit devices shall be Grade 1; type 
and function are specified in hardware sets. Provide flush with 
finished floor strikes for vertical rod exit devices in interior of 
building. Trim shall have cast satin stainless steel lever handles of 
design similar to locksets, unless otherwise specified. Provide key 
cylinders for keyed operating trim and, where specified, cylinder 
dogging. 

B. Surface vertical rod panics shall only be provided less bottom rod; 
provide fire pins as required by exit device and door fire labels. Do 
not provide surface vertical rod panics at exterior doors. 

C. Concealed vertical rod panics shall be provided less bottom rod at 
interior doors, unless lockable or otherwise specified; provide fire 
pins as required by exit device and door fire labels. Where concealed 


vertical rod panics are specified at exterior doors, provide with both 
top and bottom rods. 

D. Where removable mullions are specified at pairs with rim panic devices, 
provide mullion with key-removable feature. 

E. At non-rated openings with panic hardware, provide panic hardware with 
key cylinder dogging feature. 

F. Exit devices for fire doors shall comply with Underwriters 
Laboratories, Inc., requirements for Fire Exit Hardware. Submit proof 
of compliance. 

2.17 FLUSH BOLTS (LEVER EXTENSION) 

A. Conform to ANSI A156.16. Flush bolts shall be Type L24081 unless 
otherwise specified. Furnish proper dustproof strikes conforming to 
ANSI A156.16, for flush bolts required on lower part of doors. 

B. Lever extension manual flush bolts shall only be used at non-fire-rated 
pairs for rooms only accessed by maintenance personnel. 

C. Face plates for cylindrical strikes shall be rectangular and not less 
than 25 mm by 63 mm (1 inch by 2-1/2 inches). 

D. Friction-fit cylindrical dustproof strikes with circular face plate may 
be used only where metal thresholds occur. 

E. Provide extension rods for top bolt where door height exceeds 2184 mm 
(7 feet 2 inches). 

2.18 FLUSH BOLTS (AUTOMATIC) 

A. Conform to ANSI A156.3. Dimension of flush bolts shall conform to ANSI 
A115. Bolts shall conform to Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 
requirements for fire door hardware. Flush bolts shall automatically 
latch and unlatch. Furnish dustproof strikes conforming to ANSI A156.16 
for bottom flushbolt. Face plates for dustproof strike shall be 
rectangular and not less than 38 mm by 90 mm (1-1/2 by 3-1/2 inches). 

B. At interior doors, provide auto flush bolts less bottom bolt, unless 
otherwise specified, except at wood pairs with fire-rating greater than 
20 minutes; provide fire pins as required by auto flush bolt and door 
fire labels. 

2.19 DOOR PULLS WITH PLATES 

A. Conform to ANSI A156.6. Pull Type J401, 152 mm (6 inches) high by 19 mm 
(3/4 inches) diameter with plate Type J302, 90 mm by 350 mm (3-1/2 
inches by 14 inches), unless otherwise specified. Provide pull with 
projection of 70 mm (2 3/4 inches) and a clearance of 51 mm (2 inches). 


Cut plates of door pull plate for cylinders, or turn pieces where 
required. 

2.20 PUSH PLATES 

A. Conform to ANSI A156.6. Metal, Type J302, 200 mm (8 inches) wide by 350 
mm (14 inches) high. Provide metal Type J302 plates 100 mm (4 inches 
wide by 350 mm (14 inches) high) where push plates are specified for 
doors with stiles less than 200 mm (8 inches) wide. Cut plates for 
cylinders, and turn pieces where required. 

2.21 COMBINATION PUSH AND PULL PLATES 

A. Conform to ANSI 156.6. Type J303, stainless steel 3 mm (1/8 inch) 
thick, 80 mm (3-1/3 inches) wide by 800 mm (16 inches) high), top and 
bottom edges shall be rounded. Secure plates to wood doors with 38 mm 
(1-1/2 inch) long No. 12 wood screws. Cut plates for turn pieces, and 
cylinders where required. Pull shall be mounted down. 

2.22 COORDINATORS 

A. Conform to ANSI A156.16. Coordinators, when specified for fire doors, 
shall comply with Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., requirements for 
fire door hardware. Coordinator may be omitted on exterior pairs of 
doors where either door will close independently regardless of the 
position of the other door. Coordinator may be omitted on interior 
pairs of non-labeled open where open back strike is used. Open back 
strike shall not be used on labeled doors. Paint coordinators to match 
door frames, unless coordinators are plated. Provide bar type 
coordinators, except where gravity coordinators are required at 
acoustic pairs. For bar type coordinators, provide filler bars for 
full width and, as required, brackets for push-side surface mounted 
closers, overhead stops, and vertical rod panic strikes. 

2.23 THRESHOLDS 

A. Conform to ANSI A156.21, mill finish extruded aluminum, except as 
otherwise specified. In existing construction, thresholds shall be 
installed in a bed of sealant with ¼-20 stainless steel machine screws 
and expansion shields. In new construction, embed aluminum anchors 
coated with epoxy in concrete to secure thresholds. Furnish thresholds 
for the full width of the openings. 

B. For thresholds at elevators entrances see other sections of 
specifications. 

C. At exterior doors and any interior doors exposed to moisture, provide 
threshold with non-slip abrasive finish. 


D. Provide with miter returns where threshold extends more than 12 mm (0.5 
inch) from fame face. 

2.24 AUTOMATIC DOOR BOTTOM SEAL AND RUBBER GASKET FOR LIGHT PROOF OR SOUND 
CONTROL DOORS 

A. Conform to ANSI A156.22. Provide mortise or under-door type, except 
where not practical. For mortise automatic door bottoms, provide type 
specific for door construction (wood or metal). 

2.25 WEATHERSTRIPS (FOR EXTERIOR DOORS) 

A. Conform to ANSI A156.22. Air leakage shall not to exceed 0.50 CFM per 
foot of crack length (0.000774m3/s/m). 

2.26 MISCELLANEOUS HARDWARE 

A. Access Doors (including Sheet Metal, Screen and Woven Wire Mesh Types): 
Except for fire-rated doors and doors to Temperature Control Cabinets, 
equip each single or double metal access door with Lock Type E76213, 
conforming to ANSI A156.5. Key locks as directed. Ship lock prepaid to 
the door manufacturer. Hinges shall be provided by door manufacturer. 

B. Cylinders for Various Partitions and Doors: Key cylinders same as 
entrance doors of area in which partitions and door occur. Provide 
cylinders to operate locking devices where specified for following 
partitions and doors: 

1. Folding doors and partitions. 

2. Wicket door (in roll-up door assemblies). 

3. Slide-up doors. 

4. Swing-up doors. 

5. Fire-rated access doors-Engineer's key set. 

6. Doors from corridor to electromagnetic shielded room. 

7. Day gate on vault door. 

C. Mutes: Conform to ANSI A156.16. Provide door mutes or door silencers 
Type L03011 or L03021, depending on frame material, of white or light 
gray color, on each steel or wood door frame, except at fire-rated 
frames, lead-lined frames and frames for sound-resistant, lightproof 
and electromagnetically shielded doors. Furnish 3 mutes for single 
doors and 2 mutes for each pair of doors, except double-acting doors. 
Provide 4 mutes or silencers for frames for each Dutch type door. 
Provide 2 mutes for each edge of sliding door which would contact door 
frame. 


2.27 PADLOCKS FOR VARIOUS DOORS, GATES AND HATCHES 

A. ASTM E883, size 50 mm (2 inch) wide chain; furnish extended shackles as 
required by job conditions. Provide padlocks, with key cylinders, for 
each door in following areas as noted. 

2.28 THERMOSTATIC TEMPERATURE CONTROL VALVE CABINETS 

A. Where lock is shown, equip each cabinet door (metal) with lock Type 
E06213, conforming to ANSI A156.5. Key locks in Key Sets approved by 
Contracting Officer. See mechanical drawings and specifications for 
location of cabinets. 

B. Cabinet manufacturer shall supply the hinges, bolts and pulls. Ship 
locks to cabinet manufacturer for installation. 

2.29 HINGED WIRE GUARDS (FOR WINDOWS, DOORS AND TRANSOMS) AND WIRE PARTITION 
DOORS 

A. Butt hinges, type A8133 (special swaging) 100 mm by 90 mm (4 inches by 
3-1/2 inches), Finish US2C. 

1. 3 hinges for guards over 1060 mm (3-1/2 feet) high. 

2. 2 hinges for guards less than 1060 mm (3-1/2 feet) high. 

B. Conform to ANSI A156.5. Lock Type E06081 for guards and Type E06061 for 
partitions. 

1. Keying: Except as noted otherwise, key locks like entrance door or 
space wherein guards and partitions are located except as otherwise 
specified. 

2. Key locks for partitions enclosing mechanical and electrical 
equipment in Engineer's Set. (See detailed drawings for number of 
locks and butt hinges required for each guard). 

2.30 FINISHES 

A. Exposed surfaces of hardware shall have ANSI A156.18, finishes as 
specified below. Finishes on all hinges, pivots, closers, thresholds, 
etc., shall be as specified below under "Miscellaneous Finishes." For 
field painting (final coat) of ferrous hardware, see Section 09 91 00, 
PAINTING. 

B. 626 or 630: All surfaces on exterior and interior of buildings, except 
where other finishes are specified. 

C. Miscellaneous Finishes: 

1. Hinges --exterior doors: 626 or 630. 

2. Hinges --interior doors: 652 or 630. 

3. Pivots: Match door trim. 


4. Door Closers: Factory applied paint finish. Dull or Satin Aluminum 
color. 

5. Thresholds: Mill finish aluminum. 

6. Cover plates for floor hinges and pivots: 630. 

7. Other primed steel hardware: 600. 

D. Hardware Finishes for Existing Buildings: U.S. Standard finishes shall 
match finishes of hardware in (similar) existing spaces except where 
otherwise specified. 

2.31 BASE METALS 

A. Apply specified U.S. Standard finishes on different base metals as 
following: 

Finish 

Base Metal 

652 

Steel 

626 

Brass or bronze 

630 

Stainless steel 



PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 HARDWARE HEIGHTS 

A. For existing buildings locate hardware on doors at heights to match 
existing hardware. The Contractor shall visit the site, verify location 
of existing hardware and submit locations to VA Contracting Officer 
Representative (COR) for approval. 

3.2 INSTALLATION 

A. Closer devices, including those with hold-open features, shall be 
equipped and mounted to provide maximum door opening permitted by 
building construction or equipment. Closers shall be mounted on side of 
door inside rooms, inside stairs, and away from corridors except 
security bedroom, bathroom and anteroom doors which shall have closer 
installed parallel arm on exterior side of doors. At exterior doors, 
closers shall be mounted on interior side. Where closers are mounted on 
doors they shall be mounted with sex nuts and bolts; foot shall be 
fastened to frame with machine screws. 

B. Hinge Size Requirements: 

Door Thickness 

Door Width 

Hinge Height 

45 mm (1-3/4 inch) 

900 mm (3 feet) and less 

113 mm (4-1/2 inches) 

 

45 mm (1-3/4 inch) 

Over 900 mm (3 feet) but 
not more than 1200 mm (4 
feet) 

125 mm (5 inches) 




35 mm (1-3/8 inch) 
(hollow core wood 
doors) 

Not over 1200 mm (4 feet) 

113 mm (4-1/2 inches) 



 

C. Hinge leaves shall be sufficiently wide to allow doors to swing clear 
of door frame trim and surrounding conditions. 

D. Where new hinges are specified for new doors in existing frames or 
existing doors in new frames, sizes of new hinges shall match sizes of 
existing hinges; or, contractor may reuse existing hinges provided 
hinges are restored to satisfactory operating condition as approved by 
Contracting Officer Representative (COR). Existing hinges shall not be 
reused on door openings having new doors and new frames. Coordinate 
preparation for hinge cut-outs and screw-hole locations on doors and 
frames. 

E. Hinges Required Per Door: 

Doors 1500 mm (5 ft) or less in height 

2 butts 

Doors over 1500 mm (5 ft) high and not over 2280 mm 
(7 ft 6 in) high 

3 butts 

Doors over 2280 mm (7 feet 6 inches) high 

4 butts 

Dutch type doors 

4 butts 

Doors with spring hinges 1370 mm (4 feet 6 inches) high 
or less 

2 butts 

Doors with spring hinges over 1370 mm (4 feet 6 inches) 

3 butts 



 

F. Fastenings: Suitable size and type and shall harmonize with hardware as 
to material and finish. Provide machine screws and lead expansion 
shields to secure hardware to concrete, ceramic or quarry floor tile, 
or solid masonry. Fiber or rawl plugs and adhesives are not permitted. 
All fastenings exposed to weather shall be of nonferrous metal. 

G. After locks have been installed; show in presence of Contracting 
Officer Representative (COR) that keys operate their respective locks 
in accordance with keying requirements. (All keys, Master Key level and 
above shall be sent Registered Mail to the Medical Center Director 
along with the bitting list. Also a copy of the invoice shall be sent 
to the Contracting Officer Representative (COR) for his records.) 
Installation of locks which do not meet specified keying requirements 
shall be considered sufficient justification for rejection and 
replacement of all locks installed on project. 


3.3 FINAL INSPECTION 

A. Installer to provide letter to VA Resident/Project Engineer that upon 
completion, installer has visited the Project and has accomplished the 
following: 

1. Re-adjust hardware. 

2. Evaluate maintenance procedures and recommend changes or additions, 
and instruct VA personnel. 

3. Identify items that have deteriorated or failed. 

4. Submit written report identifying problems. 

3.4 DEMONSTRATION 

A. Demonstrate efficacy of mechanical hardware and electrical, and 
electronic hardware systems, including adjustment and maintenance 
procedures, to satisfaction of Resident/Project Engineer and VA 
Locksmith. 

3.5 HARDWARE SETS 

A. Following sets of hardware correspond to hardware symbols shown on 
drawings. Only those hardware sets that are shown on drawings will be 
required. Disregard hardware sets listed in specifications but not 
shown on drawings. 

B. Hardware Consultant working on a project will be responsible for 
providing additional information regarding these hardware sets. The 
numbers shown in the following sets come from BHMA standards. 

 

ELECTRIC HARDWARE ABBREVIATIONS LEGEND: 

ADO = Automatic Door Operator 

EMCH = Electro-Mechanical Closer-Holder 

MHO = Magnetic Hold-Open (wall- or floor-mounted) 

 

INTERIOR SINGLE DOORS 


 

HW-1Y 

Each (Lead Lined) Sliding Door to Have: NON-RATED 


1 Set Track Hardware TYPE REQUIRED FOR DOOR MATERIAL, WEIGHT, 

 AND MOUNTING DETAILS (COMPLETE WITH 

 TRACK, TRACK BRACKETS, HANGERS, GUIDES, 

 BUMPERS, AND INTERNAL TRACK STOPS) 

1 Set Recessed Pulls TYPE AS REQUIRED x LEAD-LINED 

 

HW-1Z 

Each Sliding Door to Have: NON-RATED 


1 Set Track Hardware TYPE REQUIRED FOR DOOR MATERIAL, WEIGHT, 

 AND MOUNTING DETAILS (COMPLETE WITH 

 TRACK, TRACK BRACKETS, HANGERS, GUIDES, 

 BUMPERS, AND INTERNAL TRACK STOPS) 

1 Set Recessed Pulls TYPE AS REQUIRED 

 


HW-2 

Each Door to Have: RATED/NON-RATED 

 

 Hinges QUANTITY & TYPE AS REQUIRED 

1 Keyed Privacy Indicator Lock F13 x OCCUPANCY INDICATOR 

1 Closer C02011/C02021 

1 Kick Plate J102 

1 Mop Plate (@ Inswing Doors) J103 

1 Floor Stop L02121 x 3 FASTENERS 

1 Set Self-Adhesive Seals R0Y154 

STONE THRESHOLD BY OTHER TRADES. 

 

HW-2C 

Each Door to Have: NON-RATED 

 

 Hinges QUANTITY & TYPE AS REQUIRED 

1 Privacy Lock F02-MOD X OCCUPANCY INDICATOR 

1 Kick Plate J102 

1 Mop Plate (@ Inswing Doors) J103 

1 Wall Stop L02101 CONVEX 

3 Silencers L03011 

STONE THRESHOLD BY OTHER TRADES. 

 

HW-2J 

Each Door to Have: NON-RATED 

 

 Hinges QUANTITY & TYPE AS REQUIRED 

1 Privacy Lock F02-MOD X OCCUPANCY INDICATOR 

1 Kick Plate J102 

1 Mop Plate (@ Inswing Doors) J103 

1 Wall Stop L02101 CONVEX 

1 Auto Door Bottom R0Y346 – HEAVY DUTY 

2 Set Self-Adhesive Seals R0Y154 

STONE THRESHOLD BY OTHER TRADES. 

 


HW-3E 

Each Door to Have: NON-RATED 

 

 Hinges QUANTITY & TYPE AS REQUIRED 

1 Office Lock F04 

1 Floor Stop L02121 x 3 FASTENERS 

1 Set Self-Adhesive Seals R0Y154 

1 Coat Hook L03121 

OMIT COAT HOOK WHERE GLASS LITE PREVENTS INSTALLATION. 

 

HW-4G 

Each Door to Have: RATED/NON-RATED 

 

 Hinges QUANTITY & TYPE AS REQUIRED 

1 Utility Lock F09 

1 Closer (@ Rated Doors) C02011/C02021 

1 Kick Plate J102 

1 Floor Stop L02121 x 3 FASTENERS 

1 Set Self-Adhesive Seals R0Y154 

 

HW-4J 

Each Door to Have: RATED/NON-RATED 


 Hinges QUANTITY & TYPE AS REQUIRED 

1 Utility Lock F09 

1 Closer (@ Rated Doors) C02011/C02021 

1 Kick Plate J102 

1 Floor Stop L02121 x 3 FASTENERS 

1 Threshold J32300 x 57 MM WIDTH (2-1/4 INCHES) 

1 Auto Door Bottom R0Y346 – HEAVY DUTY 

2 Sets Self-Adhesive Seals R0Y154 

 


HW-4K 

Each Door to Have: NON-RATED 

 

1 Continuous Hinge x INTEGRAL HINGE GUARD CHANNEL 

 X ADJUSTA-SCREWS 

1 Utility Lock F09 

1 Armor Plate J101 x 1.275 MM (0.050 INCH) THICKNESS 

1 Edge Guard (@ Wood Doors) J208M / J211 (VERIFY), CUT: HARDWARE 

1 Floor Stop L02121 x 3 FASTENERS 

1 Set Self-Adhesive Seals R0Y154 

 

HW-4Q 

Each Door to Have: NON-RATED 

 

1 Pivot Set C07162 x 454KG (1000 LBS) WEIGHT CAPACITY 

1 Intermediate Pivot CO7311 

1 Utility Hospital Lock F09 x LEAD-LINED x PADDLES POINTING DOWN 

1 Armor Plate J101 x 1.275 MM (0.050 INCH) THICKNESS 

2 Edge Guard (@ Wood Doors) J208M / J211 (VERIFY), CUT: HARDWARE 

1 Overhead Stop C01541-ADJUSTABLE 

1 Set Self-Adhesive Seal R0Y154 

 

 HW-5B 

Each Door to Have: RATED 

 

1 Continuous Hinge x INTEGRAL HINGE GUARD CHANNEL 

 X ADJUSTA-SCREWS 

1 Storeroom Lock F07 

1 Closer C02011/C02021 

1 Armor Plate J101 x 1.275 MM (0.050 INCH) THICKNESS 

1 Edge Guard (@ Wood Doors) J208M / J211 (VERIFY), CUT: HARDWARE 

1 Floor Stop L02121 x 3 FASTENERS 

1 Set Self-Adhesive Seals R0Y154 

 


HW-5D 

Each Door to Have: NON-RATED 

 

 Hinges QUANTITY & TYPE AS REQUIRED 

1 Storeroom Lock F07 

1 Kick Plate J102 (@ STORAGE, EVM, & HAC ROOMS ONLY) 

1 Floor Stop (@ Inswing Doors) L02121 x 3 FASTENERS 

1 Wall Stop (@ Outswing Doors) L02101 CONVEX 

3 Silencers L03011 

 

HW-10E 

Each Lead Lined Pair to Have: NON-RATED 

 

2 Pivot Sets C07162 x 454KG (1000 LBS) WEIGHT CAPACITY 

2 Intermediate Pivots CO7311 

1 Set Auto Flush Bolts TYPE 25 LESS BOTTOM BOLT x LEAD-LINED 

1 Classroom Lock F08 x LEAD-LINED x PADDLES POINTING DOWN 

1 Overlapping Astragal with R0Y634 x R0Y154 x THRU-BOLTS X LEAD-LINED 

 Self-Adhesive Seal 

2 Armor Plates J101 x 1.275 MM (0.050 INCH) THICKNESS 

4 Edge Guard (@ Wood Doors) J208M / J211 (VERIFY), CUT: HARDWARE 

2 Floor Stops L02121 x 3 FASTENERS 

1 Set Self-Adhesive Seals R0Y154 

 


 

 

HW-11 

Each Pair to Have: RATED/NR 

 

 Hinges QUANTITY & TYPE AS REQUIRED 

1 Set Auto Flush Bolts TYPE 25 LESS BOTTOM BOLT 

1 Storeroom Lock F07 

1 Coordinator TYPE 21A 

1 Overlapping Astragal with R0Y634 x R0Y154 x THRU-BOLTS 

 Self-Adhesive Seal 

2 Closers C02011/C02021 

2 Kick Plates J102 (@ STORAGE ROOMS ONLY) 

2 Floor Stops L02121 x 3 FASTENERS 

1 Set Self-Adhesive Seals R0Y154 

 

HW-12B 

Each [ADO] Pair Integrated Doors to Have: RATED 

 

1 Key Cylinder TYPE AS REQUIRED 

BALANCE OF HARDWARE BY SECTION 08 17 10, INTEGRATED DOOR ASSEMBLIES 

AUTOMATIC DOOR OPERATORS AND CONTROLS BY SECTION 08 71 13, AUTOMATIC DOOR 
OPERATORS. 

 

HW-SH-3C 

Each [PB] Door to Have: NON-RATED/RATED 

 

1 Continuous Hinge x INTEGRAL HINGE GUARD CHANNEL 

 X ADJUSTA-SCREWS 

1 Push-button Combination Lock N3 – A156.13 F07 G1 E06 

1 Closer C02011/C02021 

1 Armor Plate J101 x 1.275 MM (0.050 INCH) THICKNESS 

1 Edge Guard (@ Wood Doors) J208M / J211 (VERIFY), CUT: HARDWARE 

1 Floor Stop L02121 x 3 FASTENERS 

1 Set Self-Adhesive Seals R0Y154 


HW-SH-4B 

Each [ADO, AC, EL, REX, DPS] Door to Have: RATED 

 

1 Continuous Transfer Hinge x INTEGRAL HINGE GUARD CHANNEL 

 X ADJUSTA-SCREWS x 12-THRUWIRE 

 TRANSFER X IN-HINGE ACCESS PANEL 

1 Electrified Exit Device TYPE 1 (E01-REX, E06) F13 LEVER 

1 Key Cylinder TYPE AS REQUIRED 

1 Power Supply TYPE REQUIRED BY PANIC MANUFACTURER X ADO 

 BOARD 

1 Armor Plate J101 x 1.275 MM (0.050 INCH) THICKNESS 

1 Edge Guard (@ Wood Doors) J208M / J211 (VERIFY), CUT: HARDWARE 

1 Floor Stop L02121 x 3 FASTENERS 

1 Set Self-Adhesive Seals R0Y154 

POWER TRANSFER SHARED BY ELECTRIC PANIC AND RE-ACTIVATION SENSOR WIRING 
(RE-ACTIVATION SENSORS PROVIDED BY SECTION 08 71 13). 

AUTOMATIC DOOR OPERATOR AND CONTROLS BY SECTION 08 71 13, AUTOMATIC DOOR 
OPERATORS. 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 08 71 13 
AUTOMATIC DOOR OPERATORS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies equipment, controls and accessories for 
automatic operation of swing and sliding doors. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Door hardware; Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

B. Section 28 13 16, ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS AND DATABASE MANAGEMENT. 

C. Glass and glazing of doors and frames; Section 08 80 00, GLAZING. 

D. Electric general wiring, connections and equipment requirements; 
Division 26, ELECTRICAL. 

E. Section 28 31 00, FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Automatic door operators, controls and other equipment shall be 
products of a manufacturer regularly engaged in manufacturing such 
equipment for a minimum of three years. 

B. One type of automatic door equipment shall be used throughout the 
building. 

C. Equipment installer shall have specialized experience and shall be 
approved by the manufacturer. 

1.4 WARRANTY 

A. Automatic door operators shall be subject to the terms of the "Warranty 
of Construction", FAR clause 52.246-21, except that the Warranty period 
shall be two years in lieu of one year. 

1.5 MAINTENANCE MANUALS 

A. In accordance with Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS Article 
titled "INSTRUCTIONS", furnish maintenance manuals and instructions on 
automatic door operators. 

1.6 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's literature and data describing operators, power units, 
controls, door hardware and safety devices. 

C. Shop Drawings: 

1. Showing location of controls and safety devices in relationship to 
each automatically operated door. 


2. Showing layout, profiles, product components, including anchorage, 
accessories, as applicable. 

3. Submit templates, wiring diagrams, fabrication details and other 
information to coordinate the proper installation of the automatic 
door operators. 

D. Submit in writing to Contracting Officer Representative (COR) that 
items listed in Article 1.3 are in compliance. 

1.7 DESIGN CRITERIA 

A. As a minimum automatic door equipment shall comply with the 
requirements of BHMA 156.10. Except as otherwise noted on drawings, 
provide operators which will move the doors from the fully closed to 
fully opened position in five seconds maximum time interval, when speed 
adjustment is at maximum setting. 

B. Equipment: Conforming to UL 325. Provide key operated power disconnect 
wall switch for each door installation. 

C. Electrical Wiring, Connections and Equipment: Provide all motor, 
starter, controls, associated devices, and interconnecting wiring 
required for the installation. Equipment and wiring shall be as 
specified in Division 26, ELECTRICAL. 

1.8 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. Builders Hardware Manufacturers Association, Inc. (BHMA): 

A156.10-05..............Power Operated Pedestrian Doors (BHMA 1601) 

C. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

101-09..................Life Safety Code 

D. Underwriters Laboratory (UL): 

325-10..................Door, Drapery, Gate, Louver, and Window 
Operators and Systems 

 1.9 DELIVERY AND STORAGE 

A. Delivery shall be in factory’s original, unopened, undamaged container 
with identification labels attached. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 SWING DOOR OPERATORS 

A. General: Swing door operators shall be of institutional type, door 
panel size 600 mm to 1250 mm (2'-0" to 5'-0") width, weight not to 
exceed 300 kg (600 pounds), electric operated for overhead mounting 


within the header or transom. Furnish metal mounting supports, brackets 
and other accessories necessary for the installation of operators at 
the head of the door frames. The motor on automatic door operator shall 
be provided with an interlock so that the motor will not operate when 
doors are electrically locked from opening. 

B. Operators shall have checking mechanism providing cushioning action at 
last part of door travel, in both opening and closing cycle. Operators 
shall be capable of recycling doors instantaneously to full open 
position from any point in the closing cycle when control switch is 
activated. Operators shall, when automatic power is interrupted or 
shut-off, permit doors to easily open manually without damage to 
automatic operator system. 

C. Operator, enclosed in housing, shall open door by energizing motor and 
shall stop by electrically reducing voltage and stalling motor against 
mechanical stop. Door shall close by means of spring energy, and close 
force shall be controlled by gear system and motor being used as 
dynamic break without power, or controlled by hydraulic closer in 
electro-hydraulic operators. System shall operate as manual door 
control in event of power failure. Opening and closing speeds shall be 
adjustable: 

1. Operator Housing: Housing shall be a minimum of 112 mm (4-1/2 
inches) wide by 140 mm (5.5 inches) high aluminum extrusions with 
enclosed end caps for application to 100 mm (4 inches) and larger 
frame systems. All structural sections shall have a minimum 
thickness of 3.2 mm (0.125 inch) and be fabricated of a minimum of 
6063-T5 aluminum alloy. 

2. Power Operator: Completely assembled and sealed unit which shall 
include gear drive transmission, mechanical spring and bearings, all 
located in aluminum case and filled with special lubricant for 
extreme temperature conditions. Complete unit shall be rubber 
mounted with provisions for easy maintenance and replacement, 
without removing door from pivots or frame. 

3. Connecting hardware shall have drive arm attached to door with a pin 
linkage rotating in a self-lubricating bearing. Door shall not pivot 
on shaft of operator. 

4. Electrical Control: Operator shall have a self contained electrical 
control unit, including necessary transformers, relays, rectifiers, 
and other electronic components for proper operation and switching 


of power operator. All connecting harnesses shall have interlocking 
plugs. 

2.2 MICROPRCESSOR CONTROLS 

A. The system shall include a multi-function microprocessor control 
providing adjustable hold open time (1–30 seconds), LED indications for 
sensor input signals and operator status and power assist close 
options. Control shall be capable of receiving activation signals from 
any device with normally open dry contact output. All activation modes 
shall provide fully adjustable opening speed: 

B. The door shall be held open by low voltage applied to the continuous 
duty motor. The control shall include an adjustable safety circuit that 
monitors door operation and stops the opening direction of the door if 
an obstruction is sensed. The motor shall include a recycle feature 
that reopens the door if an obstruction is sensed at any point during 
the closing cycle. The control shall include a standard three position 
key switch with functions for ON, OFF, and HOLD OPEN, mounted on 
operator enclosure, door frame, or wall, as indicated in the 
architectural drawings. 

2.3 SLIDING DOOR OPERATORS 

A. General: Sliding doors shall have electric operators, conforming to 
BHMA A156.10 and the following requirements as applicable. Assembly 
shall be single or bi-parting sliding doors as shown on drawings. 

B. Door Operation: Doors shall be opened by electric motor pulling door 
from closed to open position and shall stop door by electrically 
reducing voltage and stalling door against mechanical stop. System 
shall permit manual control of door in event of power failure. Opening 
and closing speeds shall be adjustable. In compliance with NFPA-101, 
all door panels shall allow "breakout" to the full open position to 
provide instant egress at any point in the door’s movement. 

C. Operators: Completely assembled and sealed electromechanical operating 
unit, all located in cast aluminum housing and filled with special 
lubricant for extreme conditions. Attached to transmission system shall 
be a minimum 1/8 Hp "DC" shunt-wound permanent magnet motor with sealed 
ball bearings. Complete unit shall be rubber mounted with provisions 
for easy maintenance and replacement. Operators shall have adjustable 
opening and closing cycle. Housing shall be minimum 6063T-5 alloy 
aluminum not less than .005 mm (125 inch) minimum thickness, 150 mm by 
200 mm (6 inch wide by 8 inch high). 


D. Sliding Door Hardware Guide Rollers, Door Carrier: Top door carriers 
shall ride on steel or delrin rollers incorporating sealed bearings 
with each door having two support rollers and one anti-rise roller. 
Each roller shall have a minimum of 9 mm (3/8-inch) of vertical 
adjustment with positive mechanical locks. Each door shall also include 
two urethane covered oil impregnated bearing bottom rollers attached 
with 5 mm (3/16-inch) thick formed steel guide brackets. Each door 
carrier supporting a door leaf shall include a vertical steel 
reinforcing member to prevent sagging when door is swung under 
breakaway conditions. All carbon steel brackets and fittings shall be 
plated for corrosion resistance. 

E. Locking Hardware: Do not provide any locking hardware at interior doors 
not requiring physical security. Provide doors with flush concealed 
vertical rod panic hardware integrated into the doors where physical 
security is required and free egress is required at all times. 
Provide doors with manufacturers’ standard hookbolt lock (keyed both 
sides) where physical security is required and free egress is not 
required at all times. At doors with access control devices (card 
readers, etc.), provide doors with electronic deadbolt locking to 
prevent the doors from manually sliding open. 

F. Door Closers: Provide all breakout or swing-out panels with door 
closers concealed in the top rail of the door. 

2.4 POWER UNITS 

 Each power unit shall be self-contained, electric operated and 
independent of the door operator. Capacity and size of power circuits 
shall be in accordance with automatic door operator manufacturer's 
specifications and Division 26 – ELECTRICAL. 

2.5 DOOR CONTROLS 

A. Opening and closing actions of doors shall be actuated by controls and 
safety devices specified, and conform to ANSI 156.10. Controls shall 
cause doors to open instantly when control device is actuated; hold 
doors in open positions; then, cause doors to close, unless safety 
device or reactivated control interrupts operation. 

B. Manual Controls: 

1. Push Plate Wall Switch: Recess type, stainless steel push plate 
minimum 100 mm by 100 mm (four-inch by four-inch), with 13 mm (l/2- 
inch) high letters "To Operate Door--Push" engraved on face of 
plate. 


C. Motion Detector: The motion detector may be surface mounted or 
concealed, to provide a signal to actuate the door operator, and 
monitor the immediate zone, to detect intrusion by persons, carts or 
similar objects. The zone which the detector monitors shall be 1500 mm 
(five feet) deep and 1500 mm (five feet) across, plus or minus 150 mm 
(six inches) on all dimensions. The maximum response time shall be no 
less than 25 milliseconds. Unit shall be designed to operate on 24 
volts AC. The control shall not be affected by cleaning material, 
solvents, dust, dirt and outdoor weather conditions. 

2.6 SAFETY DEVICES 

A. General: Area over which doors swing or slide shall be a safety section 
and anyone standing in path of door's movement shall be protected by a 
safety device. 

B. At sliding doors, provide two photoelectric beams mounted at heights of 
600 mm (24 inches) and 1200 mm (48 inches) in the door frame on sliding 
doors. Provide overhead safety presence sensors at door head on each 
side of the opening. Beams shall parallel door openings to prevent 
doors from closing when anyone is in the center of the door or doors. 
When beams are activated, doors shall recycle to full open position. 
Actuation shall include a motion detector mounted on each side of the 
door for detection of traffic in each direction. 

C. Each swing door shall have installed on the pull side a presence sensor 
to detect any person standing in the door swing path and prevent the 
door from opening. 

D. Time delay switches shall be adjustable between 3 to 60 seconds and 
shall control closing cycle of doors. 

E. Decals with sign "In" or "Do Not Enter" shall be installed on both 
faces of each door where shown. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Coordinate installation of equipment with other related work. Manual 
controls and power disconnect switches shall be recessed or semi-flush 
mounted in partitions. Secure operator components to adjacent 
construction with suitable fastenings. Conceal conduits, piping, and 
electric equipment, in finish work. 

B. Install power units in locations shown. Where units are to be mounted 
on walls, provide metal supports or shelves for the units. All 


equipment, including time delay switches, shall be accessible for 
maintenance and adjustment. 

C. Operators shall be adjusted and must function properly for the type o£ 
traffic (pedestrians, carts, stretchers and wheelchairs) expected to 
pass through doors. Each door leaf of pairs of doors shall open and 
close in synchronization. On pairs of doors, operators shall allow 
either door to be opened manually without the other door opening. 

D. Install controls at positions shown and make them convenient for 
particular traffic expected to pass through openings. Maximum height of 
push plate wall switches from finished floors shall be 40 inches unless 
otherwise approved by the Contracting Officer Representative (COR). 

3.2 INSTRUCTIONS 

A. Following the installation and final adjustments of the door operators, 
the installer shall fully instruct VA personnel for 2 hours on the 
operating, servicing and safety requirements for the swing and sliding 
automatic door operators. 

B. Coordinate instruction to VA personnel with VA Contracting Officer 
Representative (COR). 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 08 71 13.11 
LOW ENERGY POWER ASSIST DOOR OPERATORS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies low energy power assisted automatic operation of 
swing doors. The door operator system shall be complete including 
operator, controls, door arm and operator enclosure (header and cover). 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Sealants; Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

B. Steel doors; Section 08 11 13, HOLLOW METAL DOORS AND FRAMES. 

C. Wood doors; Section 08 14 00, INTERIOR WOOD DOORS. 

D. Door hardware; Section 08 71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

E. Finish Color: As indicated in drawings 

F. Electric general wiring, connections and equipment requirements; 
Division 26, ELECTRICAL. 

1.3 MANUFACTURER'S QUALIFICATIONS 

A. Power assisted door operators, controls and other equipment shall be 
products of a manufacturer regularly engaged in manufacturing such 
equipment for a minimum of three years. 

B. One manufacturer of automatic door equipment shall be used throughout 
the building. 

1.4 WARRANTY 

 Power assisted door operators, controls and other related equipment 
shall be subject to the terms of the "Warranty of Construction", FAR 
clause 52.246-21, except that the warranty period shall be two years in 
lieu of one year. 

1.5 MAINTENANCE MANUALS 

 In accordance with Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS Article 
titled "INSTRUCTIONS," furnish three copies of maintenance manuals and 
instructions on automatic door operators. 

1.6 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's literature and data describing operators, power units, 
controls, door hardware and safety devices. 

C. Shop Drawings: 


Showing location of controls and safety devices in relationship to each 
automatically operated door. This includes templates, wiring diagrams, 
fabrication details, anchorage and other information to providers of 
related work to coordinate the proper installation of the door 
operators. 

1.7 DESIGN CRITERIA 

A. Power assisted automatic door equipment shall accommodate normal 
traffic as well as the weight of the doors. 

B. Equipment: UL approved and comply with applicable codes. Motors shall 
be rated minimum one-quarter horsepower and shall be single phase and 
115 volts. 

C. Electrical Wiring; Provide wiring so that only a single power supply is 
required. Equipment and wiring shall be as specified in Division 26, 
ELECTRICAL. 

D. Meet requirements of ADA-ABA Accessibility Guidelines, current version; 
VA Barrier Free Design Guide, dated August 2011 (PG-18-13); ICC/ANSI 
A117.1-03, and model code requirements for accessibility and life 
safety. 

 

1.8 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American National Standards Institute (ANSI): 

ICC/ANSI A117.1-03......Guideline for Accessible and Usable Buildings 
and Facilities-Providing Accessibility and 
Usability for Physically Handicapped People 

B. Builders Hardware Manufacturers Association, Inc. (BHMA): 

156.19-07...............Power Assist and Low Energy Power Operated 
Doors 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 OPERATORS 

A. Automatic door operators shall be for commercial doors and shall be 
electromechanical and surface mounted above the door to the header or 
transom bar. The opening force shall be generated by a permanent magnet 
DC motor driving a combination spiral bevel/spur gear reducer and 
transmitted to the door through an arm linkage. Opening speed shall be 
adjustable and feature dual backcheck control allowing adjustment of 


backcheck speed and position. Closing shall be by spring force 
generated by a metal compression spring. The spring shall reduce manual 
opening force to not more than 67 N (15 lbf). The minimum diameter of 
spring wire shall be .007mm (172 in.). Under the specified design load 
of the door, the spring shall be capable of performing 2,000,000 cycles 
before fracture. Adjustable closing speed and fixed latch speed shall 
control the door in the closing cycle. The doors shall be operated 
manually at any time without damage to the operator or components. 

B. All operators shall have checking mechanism providing cushioning action 
at last part of door travel, in both opening and closing cycle. 
Operators shall recycle doors instantaneously to full open position 
from any point in closing cycle when control switch is reactivated. 

C. Operator shall be swinging type enclosed in housing. Operator shall 
open door by energizing motor and shall stop by electrically reducing 
voltage and stalling motor against mechanical stop. Door shall close by 
means of spring energy, and close force shall be controlled by gear 
system and motor being used as dynamic break without power. System 
shall operate as manual door control in event of power failure. Opening 
and closing speeds shall be adjustable: 

1. Swing Operator Housing: Housing shall be 140 mm (5-1/2 inches) wide 
by 150 mm (6 inches) high aluminum extrusions with enclosed end caps 
for application to 100 mm (4 inch) and larger frame systems. All 
structural sections shall have a minimum thickness of 3.7 mm (0.146 
inch) and be fabricated of 6063-T5 aluminum alloy. 

2. Swing Power Operator: Completely assembled and sealed unit which 
shall include helical gear drive transmission, mechanical spring and 
bearings, all located in cast aluminum case and filled with special 
lubricant for extreme temperature conditions. A "DC" shunt-wound 
permanent magnet motor with sealed ball bearings shall be attached 
to transmission system. Complete unit shall be rubber mounted with 
provisions for easy maintenance and replacement, without removing 
door from pivots or frame. 

3. Connecting hardware for swing overhead concealed type power operator 
shall have drive arm attached to door with a pin linkage rotating in 
a self-lubricating bearing and adjustable slide block, traveling in 
an interconnected track and top pivot assembly. Top track and pivot 


assembly shall be fabricated of steel. Door shall not pivot on shaft 
of operator. 

4. Electrical Control: Operator shall have a self contained electrical 
control unit, including necessary transformers, relays, rectifiers, 
and other electronic components for proper operation and switching 
of power operator. Relays shall be plug-in type for individual 
replacement and all connecting harnesses shall have interlocking 
plugs. Control shall also include time delay for normal cycle. Swing 
door control shall include safe-swing circuit with optional 
switching which automatically limits power and slows door when 
approached from the doors swing area. 

2.2 MICROPROCESSOR CONTROLS 

A. The system shall include a multi-function microprocessor control 
providing adjustable hold open time (1 – 30 sec.), LED indications for 
actual position unknown, system status, open obstruction shutdown, 
activation signal, safety mat/sensor signal, Stop-and-Hold signal, and 
mode selector switches providing a means for easy field selection of 
the following functions: push-to-operate, latch assist and stack 
pressure. Control shall be capable of receiving activation signals from 
any device with normally open dry contact output. 

1. With push-to-operate function enabled, the control shall provide a 
means of initiating a self-start activation circuit by slightly 
pushing the door open at any point in the door swing. 

2. Latch Assist shall provide a two second impulse in the close 
direction to overcome restrictions with locking devices of pressure 
differentials, allowing the unit to operate in standard time delay 
mode, and permitting the door to close from the full open position 
after the hold time is satisfied. All activation modes shall provide 
fully adjustable opening speed. 

B. The door shall be held open by low voltage applied to the continuous 
duty motor. The control shall include an adjustable safety circuit that 
monitors door operation and shuts the motor off if an open obstruction 
is sensed. The control shall include a recycle feature the reopens the 
door if an obstruction is sensed at any point during its closing cycle. 
The control shall include a standard three position toggle switch with 
functions for ON, OFF, and HOLD OPEN. 


2.3 ENCLOSURE 

 Operator shall be completely self-contained within an extruded aluminum 
housing (alloy 6063-T6) to conceal operator mechanism and mounting 
brackets and with removable access cover with an overall maximum size 
of 140 mm (5-1/2 inches) wide by 150 mm (6 inches) deep. Header color 
shall be integral color anodized/painted to match adjacent 
storefront/frame finish. 

2.4 ACTIVATION DEVICES 

A. Automatic: Opening cycle shall be activated by pressing switches on 
each side of the door with international symbol of accessibility and 
"PRESS TO OPERATE DOOR" engraved on the faceplate. Switches shall be 
installed in a standard 2-gang electrical wall box and placed in a 
location in compliance with ANSI A117.1. Switches shall be wall mounted 
on each side of door. 

B. Manual: Push-to-operate; manually pushing the door shall activate the 
automatic opening cycle. Door shall automatically close after timer 
delay expires. 

C. Opening and closing force, measured 25 mm (1 inch) out from the lock 
stile of the door, shall not exceed 67 N (15 lbf) to stop the door when 
operating in either direction or cycle. 

D. Opening Time: Doors shall be field adjusted so that opening time to 
back check or 80 degrees, whichever occurs first, shall be 3 seconds or 
longer as required in Table 1. Backcheck shall not occur before 60 
degrees opening. 

Total opening time to fully open shall be as in Table II. 

E. Closing Time: 

Doors shall be field adjusted to close from 90 degrees to 10 degrees in 
3 seconds or longer as required in Table 1. 

1. Doors shall be field adjusted to close from 10 degrees to fully 
close position in not less than 1.5 seconds. 

2. Doors shall be field adjusted to remain fully open for not less than 
5 seconds. 

3. Table 1 provides speed settings for various widths and weights of 
doors for obtaining results complying with this paragraph. 

F. Cycle Tests: 

1. Low Energy Power Operated, Low Energy Power Open and Power Assist 
Operators shall be cycle tested for 300,000 cycles. 


2. Use the widest and heaviest door specified as a test specimen. 
Narrower or lighter doors of the same configurations shall then be 
considered to meet the cycle test requirements. 

 

 

Table 1 

Minimum Opening Time to Backcheck or 80 degrees, which ever occurs 
first and the Minimum Closing Time from 90 degrees to Latch Check or 10 
degrees. 

 

"D" Door Leaf 
Width- mm 
(inches) 

"W" Door Weight in kg (pounds) 

Matrix Values are in seconds 

 

(100) 
45.4 

(56.7) 
125 

(68.0) 150 

(79.4) 175 

(90.7) 200 

(762) 30 

3.0 

3.0 

3.0 

3.0 

3.5 

(914) 36 

3.0 

3.5 

3.5 

4.0 

4.0 

(1067) 42 

3.5 

4.0 

4.0 

4.5 

4.5 



 

Doors of other weights and widths can be calculated using the formula; 

T = DvW/133 in US units T = DvW/2260 in SI (metric) units 

Where: T= Time, seconds 

 D= Door width, mm (inches) 

 W= Door weight, kg (lbs) 

The values for "T" time have been rounded up to the nearest half second. 

These values are based on a kinetic energy of (1.25 lbf-ft). 

Table II 

Total Opening Time to Full Open Position 

Backcheck at 60 degrees 

Backcheck at 70 degrees 

Backcheck at 80 degrees 

Table 1 plus 2 seconds 

Table 1 plus 1.5 seconds 

Table 1 plus 1 second 



Note: To determine maximum times from close to full open, the operator 
shall be adjusted as shown in the chart. Backcheck occurring at a point 
between positions in Table II shall use the lowest setting. For 
example, if the backcheck occurs at 75 degrees, the full open shall be 
the time shown in Table 1 plus 1.5 seconds. 

2.5 POWER UNITS 

 Provide separate self-contained electric circuits for automatic 
operators located on each floor of the building. Interruption or 


failure of power circuits for operators located on one floor of the 
building shall not interfere with continuous performance of automatic 
operated doors located on other floors. Capacity and size of power 
circuits shall be in accordance with automatic operator manufacturer's 
specifications. 

2.6 SAFETY DEVICES 

A. Time delay switches shall be adjustable between 5 to 60 seconds and 
shall control closing cycle of doors. 

B. Decals with sign "In" or "Do Not Enter" shall be installed on both 
faces of each door where shown and shall conform to the requirements of 
ANSI/BHMA A156.19. 

C. Each swing door shall have installed a motion sensor to detect any 
person standing in the door swing path and prevent the door from 
opening. 

D. Motion sensors shall consist of detection modules, factory prepared to 
be attached to each side of the lock/strike stile, an armored flex link 
power cable and bracket assembly, factory prepared for attachment to 
the pivot stile; a logic board and a position encoder which shall mount 
to the operator. The detection modules shall contain transmitting and 
receiving diodes and sense multidimensional zones for detection of 
people and/or objects in the door area. Detection modules shall be high 
impact, shock resistant zinc castings with tinted lenses. The swing 
door sensor system shall provide complete operate and safety zone 
coverage. These zones shall be fully adjusted to meet specific jobsite 
conditions (sidewalls, adjacent panels, etc.) The system shall not be 
affected by ultrasonic, ambient light or radios frequencies within the 
vicinity of the swing door. 

E. Each swing door shall have installed a re-activation sensor mounted on 
the push-side door face near the top detect any person standing in the 
door swing path and prevent the door from closing. Wiring for the reactivation 
sensor between the door and frame shall be concealed in a 
power transfer device, hinge or pivot provided under Section 08 71 00; 
wire chase in door provided under door section. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Coordinate installation of equipment with other related work. Manual 
controls and power disconnect switches shall be recessed or semi-flush 


mounted in partitions. Secure operator components to adjacent 
construction with suitable fastenings. Conceal conduits, piping, and 
electric equipment in finish work. 

B. Install power units in locations shown. Where units are to be mounted 
on walls, provide metal supports or shelves for the units. All 
equipment, including time delay switches, shall be accessible for 
maintenance and adjustment. 

C. Operators shall be adjusted and must function properly for the type o£ 
traffic (pedestrians) expected to pass through doors. 

D. Install controls at positions shown and make them convenient for 
particular traffic expected to pass through openings. Maximum height of 
push plate wall switches from finished floors shall be 40 inches unless 
otherwise approved by the Project Manager. 

---- END ---- 


SECTION 08 80 00 
GLAZING 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies glass, plastic, related glazing materials and 
accessories. Glazing products specified apply to factory or field 
glazed items. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Factory glazed by manufacturer in following units: 

1. Sound resistant frames: Section 08 11 13, HOLLOW METAL FRAMES, and 
Section 08 14 00, INTERIOR WOOD DOORS. 

2. Mirrors: Section 10 28 00, TOILET, BATH, AND LAUNDRY ACCESSORIES. 

1.3 LABELS 

A. Temporary labels: 

1. Provide temporary label on each light of glass and plastic material 
identifying manufacturer or brand and glass type, quality and 
nominal thickness. 

2. Label in accordance with NFRC (National Fenestration Rating Council) 
label requirements. 

3. Temporary labels shall remain intact until glass and plastic 
material is approved by Contracting Officer Representative (COR). 

B. Permanent labels: 

1. Locate in corner for each pane. 

2. Label in accordance with ANSI Z97.1 and SGCC (Safety Glass 
Certification Council) label requirements. 

a. Tempered glass. 

b. Laminated glass or have certificate for panes without permanent 
label. 

c. Organic coated glass. 

3. Bullet resistance glass or plastic assemblies: 

a. Bullet resistance glass or plastic assemblies in accordance with 
UL 752 requirements for power rating specified. 

b. Identify each security glazing permanently with glazing 
manufacturer's name, date of manufacture, product number, and DOS 
Code number inconspicuously located in lower corner on protective 
side and visible after glazing is framed. 

c. The "attack (threat) side" shall be identified in bold lettering 
on each side of glazing with removable label. 


1.4 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

A. Bullet resistance glass or plastic assemblies: 

1. For blast resistant windows follow Unified Facilities Criteria, DOD 
Minimum Antiterrorism Standards for Buildings UFC4-010-01. 

2. Spall Resistance: Laminated glazing shall not produce spall to 
interior (protected side) when impacted with scheduled ballistics. 
Tolerances: 

3. Outside dimensions: Overall outside dimensions (height and width) of 
laminated security glazing shall maintain tolerance of . 3 mm. 

4. Warpage: Out-of-flat (warpage or bowing) condition of laminates 
shall not exceed 2.5 mm per lineal meter. The condition, if 
present, shall be localized to extent not greater than 0.75 mm for 
any 0.3 meter section. 

5. Coordinate with Physical Security Design Manual requirements. 

 

1.5 SUBMITTALS 

A. In accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND 
SAMPLES. 

B. Warranty: Submit written guaranty, conforming to General Condition 
requirements, and to “Warranty of Construction” Article in this 
Section. 

C. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Glass, each kind required. 

2. Elastic compound for metal sash glazing. 

3. Putty, for wood sash glazing. 

4. Glazing cushion. 

5. Sealing compound. 

6. Plastic glazing material, each type required. 

D. Samples: 

1. Size: 150 mm by 150 mm (6 inches by 6 inches). 

2. Plastic glazing materials (6 inches by 6 inches). 

1.5 DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 

A. Delivery: Schedule delivery to coincide with glazing schedules so 
minimum handling of crates is required. Do not open crates except as 
required for inspection for shipping damage. 

B. Storage: Store cases according to printed instructions on case, in 
areas least subject to traffic or falling objects. Keep storage area 
clean and dry. 


C. Handling: Unpack cases following printed instructions on case. Stack 
individual windows on edge leaned slightly against upright supports 
with separators between each. 

1.6 PROJECT CONDITIONS 

A. Field Measurements: Field measure openings before ordering tempered 
glass products. Be responsible for proper fit of field measured 
products. 

1.7 WARRANTY 

A. Warranty: Conform to terms of "Warranty of Construction", FAR clause 
52.246-21, except extend warranty period for the following: 

1. Bullet resistive plastic material to remain visibly clear without 
discoloration for 10 years. 

2. Insulating glass units to remain sealed for 10 years. 

3. Laminated glass units to remain laminated for 5 years. 

4. Polycarbonate to remain clear and ultraviolet light stabilized for 5 
years. 

5. Insulating plastic to not have more than 6 percent decrease in light 
transmission and be ultraviolet light stabilized for 10 years. 

1.8 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in text by basic designation 
only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

C542-05.................Lock-Strip Gaskets 

C716-06.................Installing Lock-Strip Gaskets and Infill 
Glazing Materials. 

C794-10.................Adhesion-in-Peel of Elastomeric Joint Sealants 

C864-05.................Dense Elastomeric Compression Seal Gaskets, 
Setting Blocks, and Spacers 

C920-11.................Elastomeric Joint Sealants 

C964-07.................Standard Guide for Lock-Strip Gasket Glazing 

C1036-06................Flat Glass 

C1048-12................Heat-Treated Flat Glass-Kind HS, Kind FT Coated 
and Uncoated Glass. 

C1376-10................Pyrolytic and Vacuum Deposition Coatings on 
Flat Glass 


D635-10.................Rate of Burning and/or Extent and Time of 
Burning of Self-Supporting Plastic in a 
Horizontal Position 

D4802-10................Poly (Methyl Methacrylate) Acrylic Plastic 
Sheet 

E84-10..................Surface Burning Characteristics of Building 
Materials 

E119-10.................Standard Test Methods for Fire Test of Building 
Construction and Material 

E2190-10................Insulating Glass Unit 

C. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR): 

 16 CFR 1201 - Safety Standard for Architectural Glazing Materials; 2010 

D. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

80-13...................Fire Doors and Windows. 

252-12..................Standard Method of Fire Test of Door Assemblies 

257-12..................Standard on Fire Test for Window and Glass 
Block Assemblies 

E. National Fenestration Rating Council (NFRC) 

F. Safety Glazing Certification Council (SGCC) 2012: 

 Certified Products Directory (Issued Semi-Annually). 

G. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

752-11..................Bullet-Resisting Equipment. 

H. Glass Association of North America (GANA): 

 Glazing Manual (Latest Edition) 

 Sealant Manual (2009) 

PART 2 - PRODUCT 

2.1 GLASS 

A. Use thickness stated unless specified otherwise in assemblies. 

B. Clear Glass: 

1. ASTM C1036, Type I, Class 1, Quality q3. 

2. Thickness, . 

3. Coordinate color/tint/coating to accommodate required security 
monitoring. 

 

2.2 HEAT-TREATED GLASS 

A. Clear Tempered Glass: 

1. ASTM C1048, Kind FT, Condition A, Type I, Class 1, Quality q3. 

2. Thickness, . 


 

2.3 PLASTIC 

A. Laminated Acrylic Sheet with natural material interlayer: 

1. ASTM D4802. Type UVF, Category A-1, clear, smooth both sides, and 
formulated with ultraviolet absorber. 

2. Thickness, 3/4 inch at waiting area; 1/2” at Nurse Stations. 

2.4 BULLET RESISTIVE ASSEMBLY 

A. Provide protection listed by UL ABPMED as bullet resisting, with a 
power rating of ballistic level 3 in accordance with UL 752. 

 

B. Fabricate from Type I, Class 1, Quality q3 glass with polyvinyl butyral 
plastic interlayers between the layers of glass. Provide ballistic 
level 3 where indicated. 

2.5 GLASS CLAD POLYCARBONATE SECURITY GLAZING ASSEMBLY 

A. Use 1.3 mm (0.050 inch) polyurethane sheeting for interlayer between 
glass and polycarbonate. 

B. Clear Heat Strengthened Glass Clad Polycarbonate. 

1. Use ASTM C1048, Kind HS, Condition A, Type I, Class 1, Quality q3, 
outer glass panes. 

2. Use clear polycarbonate sheet, 3 mm (1/8 inch) thick core. 

3. Thickness, 11 mm (7/16 inch). 

C. Clear Tempered Glass Clad Polycarbonate: 

1. Use ASTM C1048, Kind FT, Condition A, Type I, Class 1, Quality q3, 3 
mm (1/8 inch) thick outer glass panes. 

2. Use clear polycarbonate sheet, 3 mm (1/8 inch) thick core. 

3. Thickness, 11 mm (7/16 inch). 

D. Maximum Allowable Area: Laminated glazing shall not exceed 1.32 meter 

E. square unless glazing has been certified. 

2.6 FIRE RESISTANT GLASS WITHOUT WIRE MESH 

A. Type 1 (Transparent float glass), Class 1 (Clear). 

B. Fire-protective glass products used to protect against smoke and flames 
only shall be rated for [20] [45] minutes as required by local building 
code and shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 252 (Standard Methods 
of Fire Tests of Door Assemblies) and NFPA 257 (Standard on Fire Test 
for Window and Glass Block Assemblies) 

C. Fire-resistive products used to protect against smoke, flame, and the 
transmission of radiant heat shall be rated for [60] [90] [120] minutes 
and shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 252, NFPA 257, and ASTM 


E119 (Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and 
Materials). 

D. Fire-rated glass or glass assembly shall be classified by Underwriters 
Laboratory (UL), Intertek Testing Services- Warnock Hersey (ITS-WHI) or 
any other OSHA certified testing laboratory. All glass shall bear a 
permanent mark of classification in accordance with local building 
code. 

E. Maximum size is per the manufacturer’s test agency listing for doors, 
transoms, side lights, borrowed lights, and windows. 

F. Where safety glazing is required by local building code, fire-rated 
glass shall be tested in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR 1201 Category I or 
II and bear a permanent mark of classification. 

1. Category I products are limited to 0.84 m2 – 9 ft2 and tested to no 
less than 203 Nm-150 ft-lbs impact loading. 

2. Category II products are greater than 0.84 m2 – 9 ft2 and tested to no 
less than 542 Nm-400 ft-lbs impact loading. Category II products can 
be used in lieu of Category I products. 

2.7 GLAZING ACCESSORIES 

A. As required to supplement the accessories provided with the items to be 
glazed and to provide a complete installation. Ferrous metal 
accessories exposed in the finished work shall have a finish that will 
not corrode or stain while in service. 

B. Setting Blocks: ASTM C864: 

1. Channel shape; having 6 mm (1/4 inch) internal depth. 

2. Shore a hardness of 80 to 90 Durometer. 

3. Block lengths: 50 mm (two inches) except 100 to 150 mm (four to six 
inches) for insulating glass. 

4. Block width: Approximately 1.6 mm (1/16 inch) less than the full 
width of the rabbet. 

5. Block thickness: Minimum 4.8 mm (3/16 inch). Thickness sized for 
rabbet depth as required. 

C. Spacers: ASTM C864: 

1. Channel shape having a 6 mm (1/4 inch) internal depth. 

2. Flanges not less 2.4 mm (3/32 inch) thick and web 3 mm (1/8 inch) 
thick. 

3. Lengths: One to 25 to 76 mm (one to three inches). 

4. Shore a hardness of 40 to 50 Durometer. 

D. Sealing Tapes: 


1. Semi-solid polymeric based material exhibiting pressure-sensitive 
adhesion and withstanding exposure to sunlight, moisture, heat, 
cold, and aging. 

2. Shape, size and degree of softness and strength suitable for use in 
glazing application to prevent water infiltration. 

E. Spring Steel Spacer: Galvanized steel wire or strip designed to 
position glazing in channel or rabbeted sash with stops. 

 

F. Glazing Gaskets: ASTM C864: 

1. Firm dense wedge shape for locking in sash. 

2. Soft, closed cell with locking key for sash key. 

3. Flanges may terminate above the glazing-beads or terminate flush 
with top of beads. 

G. Glazing Sealants: ASTM C920, silicone neutral cure: 

1. Type S. 

2. Class 25 

3. Grade NS. 

4. Shore A hardness of 25 to 30 Durometer. 

 

H. Color: 

1. Color of other glazing compounds, gaskets, and sealants which will 
be exposed in the finished work and unpainted shall be black, gray, 
or neutral color. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 EXAMINATION 

A. Verification of Conditions: 

1. Examine openings for glass and glazing units; determine they are 
proper size; plumb; square; and level before installation is 
started. 

2. Verify that glazing openings conform with details, dimensions and 
tolerances indicated on manufacturer’s approved shop drawings. 

B. Advise Contractor of conditions which may adversely affect glass and 
glazing unit installation, prior to commencement of installation: Do 
not proceed with installation until unsatisfactory conditions have been 
corrected. 

C. Verify that wash down of adjacent masonry is completed prior to 
erection of glass and glazing units to prevent damage to glass and 
glazing units by cleaning materials. 


3.2 PREPARATION 

A. For sealant glazing, prepare glazing surfaces in accordance with GANA- 
02 Sealant Manual. 

B. Determine glazing unit size and edge clearances by measuring the actual 
unit to receive the glazing. 

C. Shop fabricate and cut glass with smooth, straight edges of full size 
required by openings to provide GANA recommended edge clearances. 

D. Verify that components used are compatible. 

E. Clean and dry glazing surfaces. 

F. Prime surfaces scheduled to receive sealants, as determined by 
preconstruction sealant-substrate testing. 

3.3 INSTALLATION - GENERAL 

A. Install in accordance with GANA-01 Glazing Manual and GANA-02 Sealant 
Manual unless specified otherwise. 

B. Glaze in accordance with recommendations of glazing and framing 
manufacturers, and as required to meet the Performance Test 
Requirements specified in other applicable sections of specifications. 

C. Set glazing without bending, twisting, or forcing of units. 

D. Do not allow glass to rest on or contact any framing member. 

E. Glaze doors and operable sash, in a securely fixed or closed and locked 
position, until sealant, glazing compound, or putty has thoroughly set. 

F. Tempered Glass: Install with roller distortions in horizontal position 
unless otherwise directed. 

G. Plastic: 

1. Use dry glazing method. 

H. Fire Resistant Glass: 

1. Wire glass: Glaze in accordance with NFPA 80. 

2. Other fire resistant glass: Glaze in accordance with UL design 
requirements. 

I. Bullet Resisting Material: 

1. Glaze as recommended by manufacturer, using glazing material which 
will permit expansion and contraction of the bullet resistive 
material in the frame. 

2. The polycarbonate surface shall not be cleaned by scraping, razor 
blade, squeegee, or use of highly alkaline cleaner. At no time shall 
polycarbonate material be exposed to chemical solvents (benzene, 
gasoline, acetone, paint thinners) or aromatic hydrocarbons (toluene 
or xylene), nor shall any of these solvents or fumes by used or 


present in confined area such as Marine Guard Booth. Due care shall 
be exercised (paint formula, ventilation, protection of 
polycarbonate) when painting becomes necessary to interiors of rooms 
of hardline glazed units; exposure to chemical solvents could result 
in irreparable damage to security glazings (delaminations, 
distortions, cracks, severe stress crazing, air bubbles). 

3.4 INSTALLATION - INTERIOR WET/DRY METHOD (TAPE AND SEALANT) 

A. Cut glazing tape to length and install against permanent stops, 
projecting 1.6 mm (1/16 inch) above sight line. 

B. Place setting blocks at 1/4 points with edge block no more than 150 mm 
(6 inches) from corners. 

C. Rest glazing on setting blocks and push against tape to ensure full 
contact at perimeter of pane or unit. 

D. Install removable stops, spacer shims inserted between glazing and 
applied stops at 600 mm (24 inch) intervals, 6 mm (1/4 inch) below 
sight line. 

E. Fill gaps between pane and applied stop with manufacturer recommended 
sealant to depth equal to bite on glazing, to uniform and level line. 

F. Trim protruding tape edge. 

3.5 INSTALLATION - INTERIOR WET METHOD (COMPOUND AND COMPOUND) 

A. Install glazing resting on setting blocks. Install applied stop and 
center pane by use of spacer shims at 600 mm (24 inch) centers, kept 6 
mm (1/4 inch) below sight line. 

B. Locate and secure glazing pane using glazers' clips. 

C. Fill gaps between glazing and stops with glazing compound until flush 
with sight line. Tool surface to straight line. 

3.6 REPLACEMENT AND CLEANING 

A. Clean new glass surfaces removing temporary labels, paint spots, and 
defacement after approval by Contracting Officer Representative (COR). 

B. Replace cracked, broken, and imperfect glass, or glass which has been 
installed improperly. 

C. Leave glass, putty, and other setting material in clean, whole, and 
acceptable condition. 

3.7 PROTECTION 

 Protect finished surfaces from damage during erection, and after 
completion of work. Strippable plastic coatings on colored anodized 
finish are not acceptable. 


3.8 GLAZING SCHEDULE 

A. Fire Resistant Glass: 

1. Install clear wire glass in interior fire rated or labeled doors and 
windows. 

B. Tempered Glass: 

1. Install in full and half glazed doors unless indicated otherwise. 

2. Install in storefront, windows, and door sidelights adjacent to 
doors. 

3. Use clear tempered glass on interior side lights and doors, and on 
exterior doors and sidelights unless otherwise indicated or 
specified. C. Clear Glass: 

1. Interior observation windows not specified otherwise. 

2. Interior pane of dual glazed windows not receiving tempered, 
laminated or organic coated glass, or other special glass indicated 
or specified. 

C. Clear Glass: 

1. Interior observation windows not specified otherwise. 

2. Interior pane of dual glazed windows not receiving tempered, 
laminated or organic coated glass, or other special glass indicated 
or specified. 

D. Bullet Resisting Assembly, Install specified assembly in service 
windows at Agent Cashier. 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 08 90 00 
LOUVERS AND VENTS 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies fixed and operable wall louvers, door louvers and 
wall vents. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Louvers in steel doors: Section 08 11 13, HOLLOW METAL DOORS AND FRAMES. 

B. Color of finish: . 

C. Louvers in lead lined wood doors: Section 13 49 00, RADIATION 
PROTECTION. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings: 

 Each type, showing material, finish, size of members, method of 
assembly, and installation and anchorage details. 

C. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

 Each type of louver and vent. 

1.4 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. The Master Painters Institute (MPI): 

Approved Product List – September 2011 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-99(R2009)..........Stainless and Heat-Resisting Chromium - Nickel 
Steel Plate, Sheet, and Strip 

A1008/A1008M-10.........Steel, Sheet, Carbon, Cold Rolled, Structural, 
and High Strength Low-Alloy with Improved 
Formability 

B209/B209M-03(R2007)....Aluminum and Aluminum Alloy, Sheet and Plate 

B221-08.................Aluminum and Aluminum Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, 
Wire, Shapes, and Tubes 

B221M-07................Aluminum and Aluminum Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, 
Wire Shapes, and Tubes 

D. National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM): 

AMP 500-06..............Metal Finishes Manual 

E. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 


90A-09..................Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating 
Systems 

F. American Architectural Manufacturers Association (AAMA): 

2605-11.................High Performance Organic Coatings on 
Architectural Extrusions and Panels 

G. Air Movement and Control Association, Inc. (AMCA): 

500-L-07................Testing Louvers 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. Aluminum, Extruded: ASTM B221/B221M. 

B. Stainless Steel: ASTM A167, Type 302B. 

C. Carbon Steel: ASTM A1008/A1008M. 

D. Aluminum, Plate and Sheet: ASTM B209/B209M. 

E. Fasteners: Fasteners for securing louvers and wall vents to adjoining 
construction, except as otherwise specified or shown, shall be toggle or 
expansion bolts, of size and type as required for each specific type of 
installation and service condition. 

1. Where type, size, or spacing of fasteners is not shown or specified, 
submit shop drawings showing proposed fasteners, and method of 
installation. 

2. Fasteners for louvers, louver frames, and wire guards shall be of 
stainless steel or aluminum. 

F. Inorganic Zinc Primer: MPI No. 19. 

2.2 EXTERIOR WALL LOUVERS 

A. General: 

1. Provide fixed type louvers of size and design shown. 

2. Heads, sills and jamb sections shall have formed caulking slots or be 
designed to retain caulking. Head sections shall have exterior drip 
lip, and sill sections an integral water stop. 

3. Furnish louvers with sill extension or separate sill as shown. 

4. Frame shall be mechanically fastened or welded construction with 
welds dressed smooth and flush. 

B. Performance Characteristics: 

1. Weather louvers shall have a minimum of 50 percent free area and 
shall pass 800 (fpm) free area velocity at a pressure drop not 
exceeding 0.14 (inch) water gage and carry not more than 0.01 g 
(ounces) of water per m² (square foot) of free area for 15 minutes 
when tested per AMCA Standard 500-L. 

2. Louvers shall bear AMCA certified rating seals for air performance 
and water penetration ratings. 

C. Aluminum Louvers: 


1. General: Frames, blades, sills; 2 mm (0.081-inch) thick extruded 
aluminum. Blades shall be drainable type and have reinforcing bosses. 

2. Louvers, fixed: Make frame sizes 13 mm (1/2-inch) smaller than 
openings. Single louvers frames shall not exceed 1700 mm (66 inches) 
wide. When openings exceed 1700 mm (66 inches), provide twin louvers 
separated by mullion members. 

2.3 CLOSURE ANGLES AND CLOSURE PLATES 

A. Fabricate from 2 mm (0.074-inch) thick stainless steel or aluminum. 

B. Provide continuous closure angles and closure plates on inside head, 
jambs and sill of exterior wall louvers. 

C. Secure angles and plates to louver frames with screws, and to masonry or 
concrete with fasteners as specified. 

2.4 WIRE GUARDS 

A. Provide wire guards on outside of all exterior louvers, except on 
exhaust air louvers. 

B. Fabricate frames from 0.081-inch thick extruded or sheet aluminum 0.059- 
inch thick stainless steel designed to retain wire mesh. 

C. Wire mesh shall be woven from not less than 1.6 mm (0.063-inch) diameter 
aluminum wire in 13 mm (1/2-inch) square mesh. 

D. Miter corners and join by concealed corner clips or locks extending 
about 57 mm (2-1/4 inches) into rails and stiles. Equip wire guards over 
four feet in height with a mid-rail constructed as specified for frame 
components. 

E. Fasten frames to outside of louvers with aluminum or stainless steel 
devices designed to allow removal and replacement without damage to the 
wire guard or the louver. 

2.5 EXTERIOR DOOR LOUVERS 

A. Fabricate of 1.6 mm (0.063-inch) thick extruded aluminum. Miter frames 
at corners and join by concealed corner brackets. 

B. Equip louvers on outside with wire guards, except omit wire guards for 
louvers in doors located completely below enclosed areaways. 

2.6 INTERIOR DOOR LOUVERS 

A. Fabricate louvers for interior doors 1.6 mm (0.063-inch) thick extruded 
aluminum. 

B. Make louvers sight-proof type with stationary blades. 

2.7 WALL VENTS 

A. Fabricate exterior wall vents from either 4.7 mm (0.187-inch) thick 
aluminum plate of 6 mm (1/4-inch) thick cast iron, perforated in diamond 
lattice pattern, with not over 19 mm (3/4-inch) openings. 


B. Vents shall have aluminum screen frame with aluminum alloy insect 
screening mounted on back of vent by means of 19 mm x 5 mm (3/4-inch by 
3/16-inch) top and bottom bars screwed to grille. 

C. Vent Frames In Masonry: Fabricate of 45 mm x 30 mm x 5 mm (1-3/4 inch by 
1-1/4 inch by 3/16-inch) steel angles bolted with 6 mm (1/4-inch) 
diameter expansion bolts at jambs. 

2.8 AIR INTAKE VENTS 

A. Fabricate exterior louvered wall ventilators for fresh air intake for 
air conditioning units from extruded aluminum, ASTM B221. Form with 
integral horizontal louvers and frame, with drip extending beyond face 
of wall and integral water stops. 

B. Provide aluminum closures for inside face of dummy vents. 

C. Provide 0.8 m (0.032-inch) thick aluminum sleeves in cavity walls . 

2.9 FINISH 

A. In accordance with NAAMM Metal Finishes Manual: AMP 500-505 

B. Aluminum Louvers Air Intake Vents, Wire Guards: 

2. Organic Finish: AAMA 2605 (Fluorocarbon coating). 

C. Steel: Surfaces of steel work, for which no other finish is specified, 
shall be cleaned free from scale, rust, oil and grease, and then given a 
light colored prime paint after fabrication, except ferrous metals 
concealed in finished work. Paint all contact surfaces of assembled work 
(except welded contact surfaces) with an additional shop coat of similar 
paint. 

2.10 PROTECTION 

A. Provide protection for aluminum against galvanic action wherever 
dissimilar materials are in contact, by painting the contact surfaces of 
the dissimilar material with a heavy coat of bituminous paint (complete 
coverage), or by separating the contact surfaces with a performed 
synthetic rubber tape having pressure sensitive adhesive coating on one 
side. 

B. Isolate the aluminum from plaster, concrete and masonry by coating 
aluminum with zinc-chromate primer. 

C. Protect finished surfaces from damage during fabrication, erection, and 
after completion of the work. Strippable plastic coating on organic 
finish is not approved. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Set work accurately, in alignment and where shown. Items shall be plumb, 
level, free of rack and twist, and set parallel or perpendicular as 
required to line and plane of surface. 


B. Furnish setting drawings and instructions for installation of anchors 
and for the positioning of items having anchors to be built into masonry 
construction. Provide temporary bracing for such items until masonry is 
set. 

C. Provide anchoring devices and fasteners as shown and as necessary for 
securing louvers and vents to building construction as specified. Power 
actuated drive pins may be used, except for removal items and where 
members would be deformed or substrate damaged by their use. 

D. Generally, set wall louvers and vents in masonry walls during progress 
of the work. If wall louvers and vents are not delivered to job in time 
for installation in prepared openings, make provision for later 
installation. Set in cast-in-place concrete in prepared openings. 

3.2 CLEANING AND ADJUSTING 

A. After installation, all exposed prefinished and plated items and all 
items fabricated from stainless steel and aluminum shall be cleaned as 
recommended by the manufacturer and protected from damage until 
completion of the project. 

B. All movable parts, including hardware, shall be cleaned and adjusted to 
operate as designed without binding or deformation of the members, so as 
to be centered in the opening of frame, and where applicable, to have 
all contact surfaces fit tight and even without forcing or warping the 
components 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 09 05 16 
SUBSURFACE PREPARATION FOR FLOOR FINISHES 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

This section specifies subsurface preparation requirements for areas to 

receive the installation of applied and resinous flooring. This section 

includes removal of existing floor coverings, testing concrete for 

moisture and pH, remedial floor coating for concrete floor slabs having 

unsatisfactory moisture or pH conditions, floor leveling and repair as 
required. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

 A. Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

B. Section 09 65 16, RESILIENT SHEET FLOORING Section 09 65 19, RESILIENT 
TILE FLOORING Section 09 67 23.20, RESINOUS EPOXY BASE WITH VINYL CHIP 
BROADCAST (RES-2) Section 09 67 23.30, Section 09 68 00, CARPETING. 

C. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA 
and TEST DATA. 

B. Written approval confirming product compatibility with subfloor 
material manufacturer and the flooring manufacturer 

C. Product Data: 

1. Moisture remediation system 

2. Underlayment Primer 

3. Cementitious Self-Leveling Underlayment 

4. Cementitious Trowel-Applied Underlayment (Not suitable for resinous 
floor finishes) 

D. Test Data: 

1. Moisture test and pH results performed by a qualified independent 
testing agency or warranty holding manufacturer’s technical 
representative. 

1.4 DELIVERY AND STORAGE 

A. Deliver materials in containers with labels legible and intact and 
grade-seals unbroken. 

B. Store material to prevent damage or contamination. 


1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in text by basic 
designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

D638-10 

 (2010) 

Test Method for Tensile Properties of Plastics 

D4259-88 

 (2012) 

Standard Practice for Abrading Concrete to alter the 
surface profile of the concrete and to remove foreign 
materials and weak surface laitance. 

C109M-12 

 (2012) 

Standard Test Method for Compressive Strength of 
Hydraulic Cement Mortars (Using 2-in. or [50-mm] Cube 
Specimens) Modified Air Cure Only 

D7234-12 

 (2012) 

Standard Test Method for Pull-Off Adhesion Strength of 
Coatings on Concrete Using Portable Pull-Off Adhesion 
Testers. 

E96/E96M - 
12 

 (2012) 

Standard Test Methods for Water Vapor Transmission of 
Materials 

F710-11 

 (2011) 

Standard Practice for Preparing Concrete Floors to 
Receive Resilient Flooring 

F1869-11 

 (2011) 

Standard Test Method for Measuring Moisture Vapor 
Emission Rate of Concrete Subfloor Using Anhydrous 
Calcium Chloride 

F2170-11 

 (2011) 

Standard Test Method for Determining Relative Humidity in 
Concrete Floor Slabs Using in situ Probes 



 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MOISTURE REMEDIATION COATING 

A. System Descriptions: 

1. High-solids, epoxy system designed to suppress excess moisture in 
concrete prior to an overlayment. For use under resinous products, 
VCT, tile and carpet where issues caused by moisture vapor are a 
concern. 

B. Products: Subject to compliance with applicable fire, health, 
environmental, and safety requirements for storage, handling, 
installation, and clean up. 

C. System Components: Verify specific requirements as systems vary by 
manufacturer. Verify build up layers and installation method. Verify 
compatibility with substrate. Use manufacturer’s standard components, 
compatible with each other and as follows: 

1. Liquid applied coating: 

a. Resin: epoxy. 


b. Formulation Description: Multiple component high solids. 

c. Application: Per manufacturer’s written installation 
requirements. 

d. Thickness: minimum 10 mils 

D. Material Vapor Permeance: Must achieve <.1 perm in accordance with ASTM 
E96. 

E. Maximum RH requirement: 100% testing in accordance with ASTM F2170. 

Property 

Test 

Value 

Tensile Strength 

 

ASTM D638 

4,400 psi 

Volatile Organic Compound 

Limits (V.O.C.) 

SCAMD Rule 1113 

25 grams per liter 

Permeance 

ASTM E96 

0.1 perms 

Tensile Modulus 

ASTM D638 

1.9X105 psi 

 

Percent Elongation 

ASTM D638 

12% 

 

Cure Rate 

Per manufactures 
Data 

4 hours Tack free 
with 24hr recoat 
window 

Bond Strength 

ASTM D7234 

100% bond to 
concrete failure 



2.2 CEMENTITIOUS SELF-LEVELING UNDERLAYMENT 

A. System Descriptions: 

1. High performance self-leveling underlayment resurfacer. Single 
component, self-leveling, cementitious material designed for easy 
application as an underlayment for all types of flooring materials. 
It is used for substrate repair and leveling. 

B. Products: Subject to compliance with applicable fire, health, 
environmental, and safety requirements for storage, handling, 
installation, and clean up. Gypsum-based products are unacceptable. 

C. System Characteristics: 

1. Wearing Surface: smooth 

2. Thickness: Per architectural drawings, ranging from feathered edge 
to 1”, per application. Applications greater than 1” require 
additional 3/8” aggregate to mix or as recommended by manufacturer. 

D. Underlayment must be calcium aluminate cement-based, containing 
portland cement. Gypsum-based products are unacceptable. 

E. Compressive Strength: Minimum 4100 psi in 28 days in accordance with 
ASTM C109M 


F. Flexural Strength: Minimum 1000 psi in 28 days in accordance with ASTM 
348 

G. Dry Time: Underlayment shall receive the application of moisture 
insensitive tile in 6 hours, floor coverings in 16 hours, and resinous 
flooring in 3-7 days. 

H. Primer: compatible and as recommended by manufacturer for use over 
intended substrate 

I. System Components: Manufacturer's standard components that are 
compatible with each other and as follows: 

1. Primer: 

a. Resin: copolymer 

b. Formulation Description: single component ready to use. 

c. Application Method: Squeegee and medium nap roller. 

 All puddles must be removed, and material must be allowed to dry, 
1-2 hours at 70F/21C. 

d. Number of Coats: (1) one. 

2. Grout Resurfacing Base: 

a. Formulation Description: Single component, cementitious selfleveling 
high early, high strength grout. 

b. Application Method: colloidal mix pump, cam rake, spike roll. 

1) Thickness of Coats: Per architectural scope, 1” lifts. 

2) Number of Coats: More than one if needed. 

c. Aggregates: for applications greater than 1inch, require 
additional 3/8” aggregate to mix. 

Property 

Test 

Value 

Compressive Strength 

 

ASTM C109 

2,200 psi @ 24 hrs 

3,000 psi @ 7 days 

Initial set time 

Final Set time 

ASTM C191 

30-45 min. 

1 to 1.5 hours 

Bond Strength 

ASTM D7234 

100% bond to 
concrete failure 



 

 

2.3 CEMENTITIOUS TROWEL-APPLIED UNDERLAYMENT(NOT SUITABLE FOR RESINOUS FLOOR 
FINISHES) 

A. Underlayment must be calcium aluminate cement-based, containing 
portland cement. Gypsum-based products are unacceptable. 

B. Compressive Strength: Minimum 4000 psi in 28 days 

C. Trowel-applied underlayment shall not contain silica quartz (sand). 

D. Dry Time: Underlayment shall receive the application of floor covering 
in 15-20 minutes. 


PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 

A. Maintain ambient temperature of work areas at not less than 16 degree C 
(60 degrees F), without interruption, for not less than 24 hours before 
testing and not less than three days after testing. 

B. Maintain higher temperatures for a longer period of time where required 
by manufacturer's recommendation. 

C. Do not install materials when the temperatures of the substrate or 
materials are not within 60-85 degrees F/ 16-30 degrees C. 

3.2 SURFACE PREPARATION 

A. Existing concrete slabs with existing floor coverings: 

1. Conduct visual observation of existing floor covering for adhesion, 
water damage, alkaline deposits, and other defects. 

2. Remove existing floor covering and adhesives. Comply with local, 
state and federal regulations and the RFCI Recommended Work 
Practices for Removal of Resilient Floor Coverings, as applicable to 
the floor covering being removed. 

B. Concrete shall meet the requirements of ASTM F710 and be sound, solid, 
clean, and free of all oil, grease, dirt, curing compounds, and any 
substance that might act as a bond-breaker before application. As 
required prepare slab by mechanical methods. No chemicals or solvents 
should be used. 
C. General: Prepare and clean substrates according to flooring 
manufacturer's written instructions for substrate indicated. 
D. Prepare concrete substrates per ASTM D4259 as follows: 


1. Dry abrasive blasting. 

2. Wet abrasive blasting. 

3. Vacuum-assisted abrasive blasting. 

4. Centrifugal-shot abrasive blasting. 

5. Comply with manufacturer's written instructions. 

E. Repair damaged and deteriorated concrete according to flooring 
manufacturer's written recommendations. 
F. Verify that concrete substrates are dry. 
G. Perform anhydrous calcium chloride test, ASTM F 1869. Proceed with 
application only after substrates have maximum moisture-vapor-emission 
rate of per flooring manufactures formal and project specific written 
recommendation. 



H. Perform in situ probe test, ASTM F2170. Proceed with application only 
after substrates do not exceed a maximum potential equilibrium relative 
humidity per flooring manufactures formal and project specific written 
recommendation. 
I. Provide a written report showing test placement and results. 
J. Prepare joints in accordance with Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS and 
material manufacturer’s instructions. 
K. Alkalinity: Measure surface pH in accordance with procedures provided 
in ASTM F710 or as outlined by qualified testing agency or flooring 
manufacturer’s technical representative. 
L. Tolerances: Subsurface shall meet the flatness and levelness tolerance 
specified on drawings or recommended by the floor finish manufacturer. 
Tolerance shall also not to exceed 1/4” deviation in 10’. As required, 
install underlayment to achieve required tolerance. 
M. Other Subsurface: For all other subsurface conditions, such as wood or 
metal, contact the floor finish or underlayment manufacturer, as 
appropriate, for proper preparation practices. 


3.3 MOISTURE REMEDIATION COATING: 

A. Where results of relative humidity testing (ASTM F2170) exceed the 
requirements of the specified flooring manufacturer, apply remedial 
coating as specified to correct excessive moisture condition. 

B. Prior to remedial floor coating installation mechanically prepare the 
concrete surface to provide a concrete surface profile in accordance 
with ASTM 4259. 

C. Mix and apply moisture remediation coating in accordance with 
manufacturer’s instructions. 

3.4 CEMENTITOUS UNDERLAYMENT: 

A. Install cementitious self-leveling underlayment as required to correct 
surface defects, floor flatness or levelness corrections to meet the 
tolerance requirements as or detailed on drawings, address non-moving 
cracks or joints, provide a smooth surface for the installation of 
floor covering, or meet elevation requirements detailed on drawings. 

B. Mix and apply in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 

3.5 PROTECTION 

A. Prior to the installation of the finish flooring, the surface of the 
underlayment should be protected from abuse by other trades by the use 
of plywood, Masonite, or other suitable protection course 


3.6 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL 

A. Where specified, field sampling of products must be conducted by a 
qualified, independent testing facility. 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 09 22 16 
NON-STRUCTURAL METAL FRAMING 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies steel studs wall systems, shaft wall systems, 
ceiling or soffit suspended or furred framing, wall furring, fasteners, 
and accessories for the screw attachment of gypsum board, plaster bases 
or other building boards. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Load bearing framing: Section 05 40 00, COLD-FORMED METAL FRAMING. 

B. Support for wall mounted items: Section 05 50 00, METAL FABRICATIONS. 

C. Ceiling suspension systems for acoustical tile or panels and lay in 
gypsum board panels: Section 09 51 00, ACOUSTICAL CEILINGS; Section 09 
29 00, GYPSUM BOARD. 

D. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 TERMINOLOGY 

A. Description of terms shall be in accordance with ASTM C754, ASTM C11, 
ASTM C841 and as specified. 

B. Underside of Structure Overhead: In spaces where steel trusses or bar 
joists are shown, the underside of structure overhead shall be the 
underside of the floor or roof construction supported by beams, trusses, 
or bar joists. In interstitial spaces with walk-on floors the underside 
of the walk-on floor is the underside of structure overhead. 

C. Thickness of steel specified is the minimum bare (uncoated) steel 
thickness. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Studs, runners and accessories. 

2. Hanger inserts. 

3. Channels (Rolled steel). 

4. Furring channels. 

5. Screws, clips and other fasteners. 

C. Shop Drawings: 

1. Typical ceiling suspension system. 

2. Typical metal stud and furring construction system including details 
around openings and corner details. 

3. Typical shaft wall assembly 


4. Typical fire rated assembly and column fireproofing showing details 
of construction same as that used in fire rating test. 

D. Test Results: Fire rating test designation, each fire rating required 
for each assembly. 

1.5 DELIVERY, IDENTIFICATION, HANDLING AND STORAGE 

 In accordance with the requirements of ASTM C754. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society For Testing And Materials (ASTM) 

A641-09.................Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) Carbon Steel Wire 

C11-10..................Terminology Relating to Gypsum and Related 
Building Materials and Systems 

C635-07.................Manufacture, Performance, and Testing of Metal 
Suspension System for Acoustical Tile and Lay-in 
Panel Ceilings 

C636-08.................Installation of Metal Ceiling Suspension Systems 
for Acoustical Tile and Lay-in Panels 

C645-09.................Non-Structural Steel Framing Members 

C754-11.................Installation of Steel Framing Members to Receive 
Screw-Attached Gypsum Panel Products 

C841-03(R2008)..........Installation of Interior Lathing and Furring 

C954-10.................Steel Drill Screws for the Application of Gypsum 
Panel Products or Metal Plaster Bases to Steel 
Studs from 0.033 in. (0.84 mm) to 0.112 in. 
(2.84 mm) in Thickness 

E580-11.................Application of Ceiling Suspension Systems for 
Acoustical Tile and Lay-in Panels in Areas 
Requiring Moderate Seismic Restraint. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

 

2.1 PROTECTIVE COATING 

 Galvanize steel studs, runners (track), rigid (hat section) furring 
channels, "Z" shaped furring channels, and resilient furring channels, 
with coating designation of G-60 minimum, per ASTM 123. 

2.2 STEEL STUDS AND RUNNERS (TRACK) 

A. ASTM C645, modified for thickness specified and sizes as shown. 

1. Use ASTM A525 steel, 0.8 mm (0.0329-inch) thick bare metal (33 mil). 

2. Runners same thickness as studs. 


B. Provide not less than two cutouts in web of each stud, approximately 300 
mm (12 inches) from each end, and intermediate cutouts on approximately 
600 mm (24-inch) centers. 

C. Doubled studs for openings and studs for supporting concrete 
backer-board. 

D. Studs 3600 mm (12 feet) or less in length shall be in one piece. 

E. Shaft Wall Framing: 

1. Conform to rated wall construction. 

2. C-H Studs. 

3. E Studs. 

4. J Runners. 

5. Steel Jamb-Strut. 

 

2.3 FURRING CHANNELS 

A. Rigid furring channels (hat shape): ASTM C645. 

B. Resilient furring channels: 

1. Not less than 0.45 mm (0.0179-inch) thick bare metal. 

2. Semi-hat shape, only one flange for anchorage with channel web leg 
slotted on anchorage side, channel web leg on other side stiffens 
fastener surface but shall not contact anchorage surface other 
channel leg is attached to. 

 

C. "Z" Furring Channels: 

1. Not less than 0.45 mm (0.0179-inch)-thick bare metal, with 32 mm 
(1-1/4 inch) and 19 mm (3/4-inch) flanges. 

2. Web furring depth to suit thickness of insulation with slotted 
perforations. 

D. Rolled Steel Channels: ASTM C754, cold rolled; or, ASTM C841, cold 
rolled. 

2.4 FASTENERS, CLIPS, AND OTHER METAL ACCESSORIES 

A. ASTM C754, except as otherwise specified. 

B. For fire rated construction: Type and size same as used in fire rating 
test. 

C. Fasteners for steel studs thicker than 0.84 mm (0.033-inch) thick. Use 
ASTM C954 steel drill screws of size and type recommended by the 
manufacturer of the material being fastened. 

D. Clips: ASTM C841 (paragraph 6.11), manufacturer’s standard items. Clips 
used in lieu of tie wire shall have holding power equivalent to that 
provided by the tie wire for the specific application. 

E. Concrete ceiling hanger inserts (anchorage for hanger wire and hanger 
straps): Steel, zinc-coated (galvanized), manufacturers standard items, 


designed to support twice the hanger loads imposed and the type of 
hanger used. 

F. Tie Wire and Hanger Wire: 

1. ASTM A641, soft temper, Class 1 coating. 

2. Gage (diameter) as specified in ASTM C754 or ASTM C841. 

G. Attachments for Wall Furring: 

1. Manufacturers standard items fabricated from zinc-coated (galvanized) 
steel sheet. 

2. For concrete or masonry walls: Metal slots with adjustable inserts or 
adjustable wall furring brackets. Spacers may be fabricated from 1 mm 
(0.0396-inch) thick galvanized steel with corrugated edges. 

H. Power Actuated Fasteners: Type and size as recommended by the 
manufacturer of the material being fastened. 

 

2.5 SUSPENDED CEILING SYSTEM FOR GYPSUM BOARD (OPTION) 

A. Conform to ASTM C635, heavy duty, with not less than 35 mm (1-3/8 inch) 
wide knurled capped flange face designed for screw attachment of gypsum 
board. 

B. Wall track channel with 35 mm (1-3/8 inch) wide flange. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

 

3.1 INSTALLATION CRITERIA 

A. Where fire rated construction is required for walls, partitions, 
columns, beams and floor-ceiling assemblies, the construction shall be 
same as that used in fire rating test. 

B. Construction requirements for fire rated assemblies and materials shall 
be as shown and specified, the provisions of the Scope paragraph (1.2) 
of ASTM C754 and ASTM C841 regarding details of construction shall not 
apply. 

3.2 INSTALLING STUDS 

A. Install studs in accordance with ASTM C754, except as otherwise shown or 
specified. 

B. Space studs not more than 610 mm (24 inches) on center. 

C. Cut studs 6 mm to 9 mm (1/4 to 3/8-inch) less than floor to underside of 
structure overhead when extended to underside of structure overhead. 

D. Where studs are shown to terminate above suspended ceilings, provide 
bracing as shown or extend studs to underside of structure overhead. 

E. Extend studs to underside of structure overhead for fire, rated 
partitions, smoke partitions, shafts, and sound rated partitions and 
insulated exterior wall furring. 

 


G. Openings: 

1. Frame jambs of openings in stud partitions and furring with two studs 
placed back to back or as shown. 

2. Fasten back to back studs together with 9 mm (3/8-inch) long Type S 
pan head screws at not less than 600 mm (two feet) on center, 
staggered along webs. 

3. Studs fastened flange to flange shall have splice plates on both 
sides approximately 50 X 75 mm (2 by 3 inches) screwed to each stud 
with two screws in each stud. Locate splice plates at 600 mm (24 
inches) on center between runner tracks. 

H. Fastening Studs: 

1. Fasten studs located adjacent to partition intersections, corners and 
studs at jambs of openings to flange of runner tracks with two screws 
through each end of each stud and flange of runner. 

2. Do not fasten studs to top runner track when studs extend to 
underside of structure overhead. 

I. Chase Wall Partitions: 

1. Locate cross braces for chase wall partitions to permit the 
installation of pipes, conduits, carriers and similar items. 

2. Use studs or runners as cross bracing not less than 63 mm (2-1/2 
inches wide). 

J. Form building seismic or expansion joints with double studs back to back 
spaced 75 mm (three inches) apart plus the width of the seismic or 
expansion joint. 

K. Form control joint, with double studs spaced 13 mm (1/2-inch) apart. 

3.3 INSTALLING WALL FURRING FOR FINISH APPLIED TO ONE SIDE ONLY 

A. In accordance with ASTM C754, or ASTM C841 except as otherwise specified 
or shown. 

B. Wall furring-Stud System: 

1. Framed with 63 mm (2-1/2 inch) or narrower studs, 600 mm (24 inches) 
on center. 

2. Brace as specified in ASTM C754 for Wall Furring-Stud System or brace 
with sections or runners or studs placed horizontally at not less 
than three foot vertical intervals on side without finish. 

3. Securely fasten braces to each stud with two Type S pan head screws 
at each bearing. 

C. Direct attachment to masonry or concrete; rigid channels or "Z" 
channels: 

1. Install rigid (hat section) furring channels at 600 mm (24 inches) on 
center, horizontally or vertically. 


2. Install "Z" furring channels vertically spaced not more than 600 mm 
(24 inches) on center. 

3. At corners where rigid furring channels are positioned horizontally, 
provide mitered joints in furring channels. 

4. Ends of spliced furring channels shall be nested not less than 200 mm 
(8 inches). 

5. Fasten furring channels to walls with power-actuated drive pins or 
hardened steel concrete nails. Where channels are spliced, provide 
two fasteners in each flange. 

6. Locate furring channels at interior and exterior corners in 
accordance with wall finish material manufacturers printed erection 
instructions. Locate "Z" channels within 100 mm (4 inches) of corner. 

D. Installing Wall Furring-Bracket System: Space furring channels not more 
than 400 mm (16 inches) on center. 

3.4 INSTALLING SUPPORTS REQUIRED BY OTHER TRADES 

A. Provide for attachment and support of electrical outlets, plumbing, 
laboratory or heating fixtures, recessed type plumbing fixture 
accessories, access panel frames, wall bumpers, wood seats, toilet stall 
partitions, dressing booth partitions, urinal screens, chalkboards, 
tackboards, wall-hung casework, handrail brackets, recessed fire 
extinguisher cabinets and other items like auto door buttons and auto 
door operators supported by stud construction. 

B. Provide additional studs where required. Install metal backing plates, 
or special metal shapes as required, securely fastened to metal studs. 

 

3.5 INSTALLING SHAFT WALL SYSTEM 

A. Conform to UL Design No. U438 for two-hour fire rating. 

B. Position J runners at floor and ceiling with the short leg toward finish 
side of wall. Securely attach runners to structural supports with power 
driven fasteners at both ends and 600 mm (24 inches) on center. 

C. After liner panels have been erected, cut C-H studs and E studs, from 9 
mm (3/8-inch) to not more than 13 mm (1/2-inch) less than 
floor-to-ceiling height. Install C-H studs between liner panels with 
liner panels inserted in the groove. 

D. Install full-length steel E studs over shaft wall line at intersections, 
corners, hinged door jambs, columns, and both sides of closure panels. 

E. Suitably frame all openings to maintain structural support for wall: 

1. Provide necessary liner fillers and shims to conform to label frame 
requirements. 

2. Frame openings cut within a liner panel with E studs around 
perimeter. 


3. Frame openings with vertical E studs at jambs, horizontal J runner at 
head and sill. 

F. Elevator Shafts: 

1. Frame elevator door frames with 0.87 mm (0.0341-inch) thick J strut 
or J stud jambs having 75 mm (three-inch) long legs on the shaft 
side. 

2. Protrusions including fasteners other than flange of shaft wall 
framing system or offsets from vertical alignments more than 3 mm 
(1/8-inch) are not permitted unless shown. 

3. Align shaft walls for plumb vertical flush alignment from top to 
bottom of shaft. 

3.6 INSTALLING FURRED AND SUSPENDED CEILINGS OR SOFFITS 

A. Install furred and suspended ceilings or soffits in accordance with ASTM 
C754 or ASTM C841 except as otherwise specified or shown for screw 
attached gypsum board ceilings and for plaster ceilings or soffits. 

1. Space framing at 400 mm (16-inch) centers for metal lath anchorage. 

2. Space framing at 600 mm (24-inch) centers for gypsum board anchorage. 

B. New exposed concrete slabs: 

1. Use metal inserts required for attachment and support of hangers or 
hanger wires with tied wire loops for embedding in concrete. 

2. Furnish for installation under Division 3, CONCRETE. 

3. Suspended ceilings under concrete rib construction shall have runner 
channels at right angles to ribs and be supported from ribs with 
hangers at ends and at 1200 mm (48-inch) maximum intervals along 
channels. Stagger hangers at alternate channels. 

C. Concrete slabs on steel decking composite construction: 

1. Use pull down tabs when available. 

2. Use power activated fasteners when direct attachment to structural 
framing can not be accomplished. 

D. Where bar joists or beams are more than 1200 mm (48 inches) apart, 
provide intermediate hangers so that spacing between supports does not 
exceed 1200 mm (48 inches). Use clips, bolts, or wire ties for direct 
attachment to steel framing. 

E. Existing concrete construction exposed or concrete on steel decking: 

1. Use power actuated fasteners either eye pin, threaded studs or drive 
pins for type of hanger attachment required. 

2. Install fasteners at approximate mid height of concrete beams or 
joists. Do not install in bottom of beams or joists. 

F. Steel decking without concrete topping: 

1. Do not fasten to steel decking 0.76 mm (0.0299-inch) or thinner. 


2. Toggle bolt to decking 0.9 mm (0.0359-inch) or thicker only where 
anchorage to steel framing is not possible. 

G. Installing suspended ceiling system for gypsum board (ASTM C635 Option): 

1. Install only for ceilings to receive screw attached gypsum board. 

2. Install in accordance with ASTM C636. 

a. Install main runners spaced 1200 mm (48 inches) on center. 

b. Install 1200 mm (four foot) tees not over 600 mm (24 inches) on 
center; locate for edge support of gypsum board. 

c. Install wall track channel at perimeter. 

 

H. Installing Ceiling Bracing System: 

1. Construct bracing of 38 mm (1-1/2 inch) channels for lengths up to 
2400 mm (8 feet) and 50 mm (2 inch) channels for lengths over 2400 mm 
(8 feet) with ends bent to form surfaces for anchorage to carrying 
channels and over head construction. Lap channels not less than 600 
mm (2 feet) at midpoint back to back. Screw or bolt lap together with 
two fasteners. 

2. Install bracing at an approximate 45 degree angle to carrying 
channels and structure overhead; secure as specified to structure 
overhead with two fasteners and to carrying channels with two 
fasteners or wire ties. 

3. Brace suspended ceiling or soffit framing in seismic areas in 
accordance with ASTM E580. 

3.7 TOLERANCES 

A. Fastening surface for application of subsequent materials shall not vary 
more than 3 mm (1/8-inch) from the layout line. 

B. Plumb and align vertical members within 3 mm (1/8-inch.) 

C. Level or align ceilings within 3 mm (1/8-inch.) 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 09 29 00 
GYPSUM BOARD 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies installation and finishing of gypsum board. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Installation of steel framing members for walls, partitions, furring, 
soffits, and ceilings: Section 09 22 16, NON-STRUCTURAL METAL FRAMING. 

B. Sound deadening batts: Section 07 21 13, THERMAL AND ACOUSTIC 
INSULATION. 

C. Acoustical Sealants: Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

D. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 TERMINOLOGY 

A. Definitions and description of terms shall be in accordance with ASTM 
C11, C840, and as specified. 

B. Underside of Structure Overhead: In spaces where steel trusses or bar 
joists are shown, the underside of structure overhead shall be the 
underside of the floor or roof construction supported by the trusses or 
bar joists. 

C. "Yoked": Gypsum board cut out for opening with no joint at the opening 
(along door jamb or above the door). 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Cornerbead and edge trim. 

2. Finishing materials. 

3. Laminating adhesive. 

4. Gypsum board, each type. 

C. Shop Drawings: 

1. Typical gypsum board installation, showing corner details, edge trim 
details and the like. 

2. Typical sound rated assembly, showing treatment at perimeter of 
partitions and penetrations at gypsum board. 

3. Typical shaft wall assembly. 

4. Typical fire rated assembly and column fireproofing, indicating 
details of construction same as that used in fire rating test. 

D. Samples: 

1. Cornerbead. 

2. Edge trim. 


3. Control joints. 

E. Test Results: 

1. Fire rating test, each fire rating required for each assembly. 

2. Sound rating test. 

1.5 DELIVERY, IDENTIFICATION, HANDLING AND STORAGE 

 In accordance with the requirements of ASTM C840. 

1.6 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS 

 In accordance with the requirements of ASTM C840. 

1.7 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing And Materials (ASTM): 

C11-08..................Terminology Relating to Gypsum and Related 
Building Materials and Systems 

C475-02.................Joint Compound and Joint Tape for Finishing 
Gypsum Board 

C840-08.................Application and Finishing of Gypsum Board 

C919-08.................Sealants in Acoustical Applications 

C954-07.................Steel Drill Screws for the Application of Gypsum 
Board or Metal Plaster Bases to Steel Stud from 
0.033 in. (0.84mm) to 0.112 in. (2.84mm) in 
thickness 

C1002-07................Steel Self-Piercing Tapping Screws for the 
Application of Gypsum Panel Products or Metal 
Plaster Bases to Wood Studs or Steel Studs 

C1047-05................Accessories for Gypsum Wallboard and Gypsum 
Veneer Base 

C1177-06................Glass Mat Gypsum Substrate for Use as Sheathing 

C1658-06................Glass Mat Gypsum Panels 

C1396-06................Gypsum Board 

E84-08..................Surface Burning Characteristics of Building 
Materials 

C. Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL): 

Latest Edition..........Fire Resistance Directory 

D. Inchcape Testing Services (ITS): 

Latest Editions.........Certification Listings 


PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 GYPSUM BOARD 

A. Gypsum Board: ASTM C1396, Type X, 16 mm (5/8 inch) thick unless shown 
otherwise. Shall contain a minimum of 20 percent recycled gypsum. 

B. Coreboard or Shaft Wall Liner Panels. 

1. ASTM C1396, Type X. 

2. ASTM C1658: Glass Mat Gypsum Panels, 

3. Coreboard for shaft walls 300, 400, 600 mm (12, 16, or 24 inches) 
wide by required lengths 25 mm (one inch) thick with paper faces 
treated to resist moisture. 

C. Water Resistant Gypsum Backing Board: ASTM C620, Type X, 16 mm (5/8 
inch) thick. 

D. Gypsum cores shall contain maximum percentage of post industrial 
recycled gypsum content available in the area (a minimum of 95 percent 
post industrial recycled gypsum content). Paper facings shall contain 
100 percent post-consumer recycled paper content. 

2.2 GYPSUM SHEATHING BOARD 

A. ASTM C1396, Type X, water-resistant core, 16 mm (5/8 inch) thick. 

B. ASTM C1177, Type X. 

2.3 ACCESSORIES 

A. ASTM C1047, except form of 0.39 mm (0.015 inch) thick zinc coated steel 
sheet or rigid PVC plastic. 

B. Flanges not less than 22 mm (7/8 inch) wide with punchouts or 
deformations as required to provide compound bond. 

2.4 FASTENERS 

A. ASTM C1002 and ASTM C840, except as otherwise specified. 

B. ASTM C954, for steel studs thicker than 0.04 mm (0.33 inch). 

C. Select screws of size and type recommended by the manufacturer of the 
material being fastened. 

D. For fire rated construction, type and size same as used in fire rating 
test. 

E. Clips: Zinc-coated (galvanized) steel; gypsum board manufacturer's 
standard items. 

2.5 FINISHING MATERIALS AND LAMINATING ADHESIVE 

 ASTM C475 and ASTM C840. Free of antifreeze, vinyl adhesives, 
preservatives, biocides and other VOC. Adhesive shall contain a maximum 
VOC content of 50 g/l. 


PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 GYPSUM BOARD HEIGHTS 

A. Extend all layers of gypsum board from floor to underside of structure 
overhead on following partitions and furring and as shown on drawings: 

1. Two sides of partitions: 

a. Fire rated partitions. 

b. Smoke partitions. 

c. Sound rated partitions. 

d. Full height partitions shown (FHP). 

e. Corridor partitions. 

2. One side of partitions or furring: 

a. Inside of exterior wall furring or stud construction. 

b. Room side of room without suspended ceilings. 

c. Furring for pipes and duct shafts, except where fire rated shaft 
wall construction is shown. 

d. Corridor partitions. 

3. Extend all layers of gypsum board construction used for fireproofing 
of columns from floor to underside of structure overhead, unless 
shown otherwise. 

B. In locations other than those specified, extend gypsum board from floor 
to heights as follows: 

1. Not less than 100 mm (4 inches) above suspended acoustical ceilings. 

2. At ceiling of suspended gypsum board ceilings. 

3. At existing ceilings. 

3.2 INSTALLING GYPSUM BOARD 

A. Coordinate installation of gypsum board with other trades and related 
work. 

B. Install gypsum board in accordance with ASTM C840, except as otherwise 
specified. 

C. Moisture and Mold–Resistant Assemblies: Provide and install moisture and 
mold-resistant glass mat gypsum wallboard products with moistureresistant 
surfaces complying with ASTM C1658 where shown and in 
locations which might be subject to moisture exposure during 
construction. 

D. Use gypsum boards in maximum practical lengths to minimize number of end 
joints. 

E. Bring gypsum board into contact, but do not force into place. 

F. Ceilings: 

1. For single-ply construction, use perpendicular application. 

2. For two-ply assembles: 

a. Use perpendicular application. 


b. Apply face ply of gypsum board so that joints of face ply do not 
occur at joints of base ply with joints over framing members. 

G. Walls (Except Shaft Walls): 

1. When gypsum board is installed parallel to framing members, space 
fasteners 300 mm (12 inches) on center in field of the board, and 200 
mm (8 inches) on center along edges. 

2. When gypsum board is installed perpendicular to framing members, 
space fasteners 300 mm (12 inches) on center in field and along 
edges. 

3. Stagger screws on abutting edges or ends. 

4. For single-ply construction, apply gypsum board with long dimension 
either parallel or perpendicular to framing members as required to 
minimize number of joints except gypsum board shall be applied 
vertically over "Z" furring channels. 

5. For two-ply gypsum board assemblies, apply base ply of gypsum board 
to assure minimum number of joints in face layer. Apply face ply of 
wallboard to base ply so that joints of face ply do not occur at 
joints of base ply with joints over framing members. 

6. For three-ply gypsum board assemblies, apply plies in same manner as 
for two-ply assemblies, except that heads of fasteners need only be 
driven flush with surface for first and second plies. Apply third ply 
of wallboard in same manner as second ply of two-ply assembly, except 
use fasteners of sufficient length enough to have the same 
penetration into framing members as required for two-ply assemblies. 

7. No offset in exposed face of walls and partitions will be permitted 
because of single-ply and two-ply or three-ply application 
requirements. 

8. Control Joints ASTM C840 and as follows: 

a. Locate at both side jambs of openings if gypsum board is not 
"yoked". Use one system throughout. 

b. Not required for wall lengths less than 9000 mm (30 feet). 

c. Extend control joints the full height of the wall or length of 
soffit/ceiling membrane. 

H. Acoustical or Sound Rated Partitions, Fire and Smoke Partitions: 

1. Cut gypsum board for a space approximately 3 mm to 6 mm (1/8 to 1/4 
inch) wide around partition perimeter. 

2. Coordinate for application of caulking or sealants to space prior to 
taping and finishing. 

3. For sound rated partitions, use sealing compound (ASTM C919) to fill 
the annular spaces between all receptacle boxes and the partition 
finish material through which the boxes protrude to seal all holes 


and/or openings on the back and sides of the boxes. STC minimum 
values as shown. 

I. Electrical and Telecommunications Boxes: 

1. Seal annular spaces between electrical and telecommunications 
receptacle boxes and gypsum board partitions. 

J. Accessories: 

1. Set accessories plumb, level and true to line, neatly mitered at 
corners and intersections, and securely attach to supporting surfaces 
as specified. 

2. Install in one piece, without the limits of the longest commercially 
available lengths. 

3. Corner Beads: 

a. Install at all vertical and horizontal external corners and where 
shown. 

b. Use screws only. Do not use crimping tool. 

4. Edge Trim (casings Beads): 

a. At both sides of expansion and control joints unless shown 
otherwise. 

b. Where gypsum board terminates against dissimilar materials and at 
perimeter of openings, except where covered by flanges, casings or 
permanently built-in equipment. 

c. Where gypsum board surfaces of non-load bearing assemblies abut 
load bearing members. 

d. Where shown. 

3.3 INSTALLING GYPSUM SHEATHING 

A. Install in accordance with ASTM C840, except as otherwise specified or 
shown. 

B. Use screws of sufficient length to secure sheathing to framing. 

C. Space screws 9 mm (3/8 inch) from ends and edges of sheathing and 200 mm 
(8 inches) on center. Space screws a maximum of 200 mm (8 inches) on 
center on intermediate framing members. 

D. Apply 600 mm by 2400 mm (2 foot by 8 foot) sheathing boards horizontally 
with tongue edge up. 

E. Apply 1200 mm by 2400 mm or 2700 mm (4 ft. by 8 ft. or 9 foot) gypsum 
sheathing boards vertically with edges over framing. 

3.4 FINISHING OF GYPSUM BOARD 

A. Finish joints, edges, corners, and fastener heads in accordance with 
ASTM C840. Use Level 4 finish for al finished areas open to public view. 

B. Before proceeding with installation of finishing materials, assure the 
following: 

1. Gypsum board is fastened and held close to framing or furring. 


2. Fastening heads in gypsum board are slightly below surface in dimple 
formed by driving tool. 

C. Finish joints, fasteners, and all openings, including openings around 
penetrations, on that part of the gypsum board extending above suspended 
ceilings to seal surface of non decorated, smoke barrier, fire rated and 
sound rated and sound rated gypsum board construction. After the 
installation of hanger rods, hanger wires, supports, equipment, 
conduits, piping and similar work, seal remaining openings and maintain 
the integrity of the smoke barrier, fire rated and sound rated 
construction. Sanding is not required of non decorated surfaces. 

3.5 REPAIRS 

A. After taping and finishing has been completed, and before decoration, 
repair all damaged and defective work, including nondecorated surfaces. 

B. Patch holes or openings 13 mm (1/2 inch) or less in diameter, or 
equivalent size, with a setting type finishing compound or patching 
plaster. 

C. Repair holes or openings over 13 mm (1/2 inch) diameter, or equivalent 
size, with 16 mm (5/8 inch) thick gypsum board secured in such a manner 
as to provide solid substrate equivalent to undamaged surface. 

D. Tape and refinish scratched, abraded or damaged finish surfaces 
including cracks and joints in non decorated surface to provide smoke 
tight construction fire protection equivalent to the fire rated 
construction and STC equivalent to the sound rated construction. 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 09 30 13 
CERAMIC/PORCELAIN TILING 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

This section specifies porcelain, marble thresholds and window stools, 
waterproofing membranes for thin-set applications, crack isolation 
membranes, tile backer board. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Preformed sealant joints in tile flooring: Section 07 95 13, EXPANSION 
JOINT COVER ASSEMBLIES. 

A. Sealing of joints where specified: Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

B. Color, texture and pattern of field tile and trim shapes, size of field 
tile, trim shapes, and color of grout specified: Section 09 06 00, 
SCHEDULE FOR FINISHES. 

 

D. Metal and resilient edge strips at joints with new resilient flooring, 
and carpeting: Section 09 65 19, RESILIENT TILE FLOORING 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Samples: 

1. Base tile, each type, each color, each size. 

5. Porcelain tile, each type, color, patterns and size. 

6. Wall (or wainscot) tile, each color, size and pattern. 

7. Trim shapes, bullnose cap and cove including bullnose cap and base 
pieces at internal and external corners of vertical surfaces, each 
type, color, and size. 

C. Product Data: 

1. Porcelain tile, marked to show each type, size, and shape required. 

2. Chemical resistant mortar and grout (Epoxy and Furan). 

3. Cementitious backer unit. 

4. Dry-set Portland cement mortar and grout. 

5. Divider strip. 

6. Elastomeric membrane and bond coat. 

7. Reinforcing tape. 

8. Leveling compound. 

9. Latex-Portland cement mortar and grout. 


10. Commercial Portland cement grout. 

11. Organic adhesive. 

12. Slip resistant tile. 

13. Waterproofing isolation membrane. 

14. Fasteners. 

D. Certification: 

1. Master grade, ANSI A137.1. 

2. Manufacturer's certificates indicating that the following materials 
comply with specification requirements: 

a. Chemical resistant mortar and grout (epoxy and furan). 

b. Modified epoxy emulsion. 

d. Cementitious backer unit. 

f. Elastomeric membrane and bond coat. 

g. Reinforcing tape. 

i. Leveling compound. 

k. Waterproof isolation membrane. 

l. Factory mounted tile suitability for application in wet area 
specified under 2.1, A, 3 with list of successful in-service 
performance locations. 

1.4 DELIVERY AND STORAGE 

A. Deliver materials in containers with labels legible and intact and 
grade-seals unbroken. 

B. Store material to prevent damage or contamination. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in text by basic 
designation only. 

B. American National Standards Institute (ANSI): 

A108.1A-11..............Installation of Ceramic Tile in the Wet-Set 
Method with Portland Cement Mortar 

A108.1B-11..............Installation of Ceramic Tile on a Cured 
Portland Cement Mortar Setting Bed with dry-Set 
or latex-Portland Cement Mortar 

A108.1C-11..............Contractors Option; Installation of Ceramic 
Tile in the Wet-Set method with Portland Cement 
Mortar or Installation of Ceramic Tile on a 
Cured Portland Cement Mortar Setting Bed with 
Dry-Set or Latex-Portland Cement Mortar 


A137.1-08...............Ceramic Tile 

C. American Society For Testing And Materials (ASTM): 


A185-07.................Steel Welded Wire Fabric, Plain, for Concrete 
Reinforcing 

C109/C109M-11...........Standard Test Method for Compressive Strength 
of Hydraulic Cement Mortars (Using 2 inch. or 
[50-mm] Cube Specimens) 

C627-10.................Evaluating Ceramic Floor Tile Installation 
Systems Using the Robinson-Type Floor Tester 

C954-11.................Steel Drill Screws for the Application of 
Gypsum Board on Metal Plaster Base to Steel 
Studs from 0.033 in (0.84 mm) to 0.112 in (2.84 
mm) in thickness 

C1002-07................Steel Self-Piercing Tapping Screws for the 
Application of Panel Products 

C1028-07................Determining the Static Coefficient of Friction 
of Ceramic Tile and Other Like Surfaces by the 
Horizontal Dynamometer Pull Meter Method 

C1127-09................Standard Guide for Use of High Solids Content, 
Cold Liquid-Applied Elastomeric Waterproofing 
Membrane with an Integral Wearing Surface 

C1178/C1178M-11.........Standard Specification for Coated Glass Mat 
Water-Resistant Gypsum Backing Panel 

C1325-08................Non-Asbestos Fiber-Mat Reinforced Cementitious 
Backer Units 

D4397-10................Standard Specification for Polyethylene 
Sheeting for Construction, Industrial and 
Agricultural Applications 

D5109-99(R2004).........Standard Test Methods for Copper-Clad 
Thermosetting Laminates for Printed Wiring 
Boards 

D. Marble Institute of America (MIA): Design Manual III-2007 

E. Tile Council of America, Inc. (TCA): 

2007....................Handbook for Ceramic Tile Installation 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 TILE 

A. Comply with ANSI A137.1, Standard Grade, except as modified: 

1. Inspection procedures listed under the Appendix of ANSI A137.1. 


2. Abrasion Resistance Classification: 

a. Tested in accordance with values listed in Table 1, ASTM C 1027. 

b. Class V, 12000 revolutions for floors in Corridors, Kitchens, 
Storage including Refrigerated Rooms 

c. Class IV, 6000 revolutions for remaining areas. 

3. Slip Resistant Tile for Floors: 

a. Coefficient of friction, when tested in accordance with ASTM 
C1028, required for level of performance: 

1) Not less than 0.7 (wet condition) for bathing areas. 

2) Not less than 0.8 on ramps for wet and dry conditions. 

3) Not less than 0.6, except 0.8 on ramps as stated above, for 
wet and dry conditions for other areas. 

6. Factory Blending: For tile with color variations, within the ranges 
selected during sample submittals blend tile in the factory and 
package so tile units taken from one package show the same range in 
colors as those taken from other packages and match approved 
samples. 

 

7. Factory-Applied Temporary Protective Coating: 

a. Protect exposed face surfaces (top surface) of tile against 
adherence of mortar and grout by pre-coating with a continuous 
film of petroleum paraffin wax, applied hot. 

b. Do not coat unexposed tile surfaces. 

c. Pre-wax tiles set or grouted with furan or epoxy or latex 
modified mortars. 

 

F. Trim Shapes: 

1. Conform to applicable requirements of adjoining floor and wall tile. 

. 

3. Use trim shapes sizes conforming to size of adjoining field wall 
tile including existing spaces unless detailed or specified 
otherwise in Section 09 06 00, SCHEDULE FOR FINISHES. 

4. Internal and External Corners: 

a. Square internal and external corner joints are not acceptable. 

b. External corners including edges: Use bullnose shapes. 

c. Internal corners: Use cove shapes. 

d. Base to floor internal corners: Use special shapes providing 
integral cove vertical and horizontal joint. 


e. Base to floor external corners: Use special shapes providing 
bullnose vertical edge with integral cove horizontal joint. Use 
stop at bottom of openings having bullnose return to wall. 

f. Wall top edge internal corners: Use special shapes providing 
integral cove vertical joint with bullnose top edge. 

g. Wall top edge external corners: Use special shapes providing 
bullnose vertical and horizontal joint edge. 

k. Provide cove and bullnose shapes where shown, and required to 
complete tile work. 

2.2 CEMENTITIOUS BACKER UNITS 

A. Use in showers or wet areas. 

B. ASTM C1325. 

C. Use Cementitious backer units in maximum available lengths. 

2.3 JOINT MATERIALS FOR CEMENTITIOUS BACKER UNITS 

A. Reinforcing Tape: Vinyl coated woven glass fiber mesh tape, open weave, 
50 mm (2 inches) wide. Tape with pressure sensitive adhesive backing 
will not be permitted. 

B. Tape Embedding Material: Latex-Portland cement mortar complying with 
ANSI A108.1. 

C. Joint material, including reinforcing tape, and tape embedding 
material, shall be as specifically recommended by the backer unit 
manufacturer. 

2.4 FASTENERS 

A. Screws for Cementitious Backer Units. 

1. Standard screws for gypsum board are not acceptable. 

2. Minimum 11 mm (7/16 inch) diameter head, corrosion resistant coated, 
with washers. 

3. ASTM C954 for steel 1 mm (0.033 inch) thick. 

4. ASTM C1002 for steel framing less than 0.0329 inch thick. 

B. Washers: Galvanized steel, 13 mm (1/2 inch) minimum diameter. 

2.5 GLASS MAT WATER RESISTANT GYPSUM BACKER BOARD 

Confirm to ASTM C1178/C1178M, Optional System for Cementious Backer Units. 

2.6 SETTING MATERIALS OR BOND COATS 

A. Conform to TCA Handbook for Ceramic Tile Installation. 

B. Portland Cement Mortar: ANSI A108.1. 

C. Latex-Portland Cement Mortar: ANSI A108.1. 

1. For wall applications, provide non-sagging, latex-Portland cement 
mortar complying with ANSI A108.1. 


2. Prepackaged Dry-Mortar Mix: Factory-prepared mixture of Portland 
cement; dry, redispersible, ethylene vinyl acetate additive; and 
other ingredients to which only water needs to be added at Project 
site. 

D. Dry-Set Portland Cement Mortar: ANSI A108.1. For wall applications, 
provide non-sagging, latex-Portland cement mortar complying with ANSI 
A108.4. 

F. Chemical-Resistant Bond Coat: 

1. Epoxy Resin Type: ANSI A108.1. 

2. Furan Resin Type: ANSI A108.1. 

 

 

G. Elastomeric Waterproofing Membrane and Bond Coat: 

1. TCA F122-02. 

2. ANSI A108.1. 

3. One component polyurethane, liquid applied material having the 
following additional physical properties: 

a. Hardness: Shore "A" between 40-60. 

b. Elongation: Between 300-600 percent. 

c. Tensile strength: Between 40-60 psig. 

d. No volatile compounds. 

4. Coal tar modified urethanes are not acceptable. 

H. Waterproofing Isolation Membrane: 

1. Sheet System TCA F122-02. 

2. Optional System to elastomeric waterproof membrane. 

3. Composite sheet consisting of ASTM D5109, Type II, Grade I 
Chlorinated Polyethylene (CM) sheet reinforced on both sides with a 
non-woven polyester fiber. 

4. Designed for use in wet areas as an isolation and positive 
waterproofing membranes for thin-set bonding of sheet to substrate 
and thin-set bonding of ceramic and porcelain tile or marble to 
sheet. Suited for both horizontal and vertical applications. 

5. Conform to the following additional physical properties: 

 

Property 

Units 

Results 

Test Method 

Hardness 
Shore A 

Points 

70-80 

ASTM D2240 (10 
Second Reading) 

Shrinkage 

Percent 

5 maximum 

ASTM D1204 




Brittleness 

 

No crack remains 
flexible at 
temperature-37 
degrees C (-25 
degrees F) 

ASTM D2497 13 mm 
(1/2- inch) 
Mandrel Bend 

Retention of 
Properties 
after Heat 
Aging 

Percent of 
original 

80 Tensile 

80 Breaking 

80 Elongation 

ASTM D3045, 90 
degrees C (194 
degrees F) for 168 
hours 



 

6. Manufacturer’s standard sheet size with prefabricated or preformed 
inside and outside corners. 

7. Sheet manufacturer’s solvent welding liquid or xylene and edge 
sealant. 

2.7 GROUTING MATERIALS 

A. Coloring Pigments: 

1. Pure mineral pigments, limeproof and nonfading, complying with ASTM 
C979. 

2. Add coloring pigments to grout by the manufacturer. 

3. Job colored grout is not acceptable. 

4. Use is required in Commercial Portland Cement Grout, Dry-Set Grout, 
and Latex-Portland Cement Grout. 

F. Chemical-Resistant Grout: 

1. Epoxy grout, ANSI A108.1.color as specified 

2.8 PATCHING AND LEVELING COMPOUND 

A. Portland cement base, polymer-modified, self-leveling compound, 
manufactured specifically for resurfacing and leveling concrete floors. 
Products containing gypsum are not acceptable. 

B. Shall have minimum following physical properties: 

1. Compressive strength - 25 MPa (3500 psig) per ASTM C109/C109M. 

2. Flexural strength - 7 MPa (1000 psig) per ASTM C348 (28 day value). 

3. Tensile strength - 600 psi per ANSI 118.7. 

4. Density – 1.9. 

C. Capable of being applied in layers up to 38 mm (1-1/2 inches) thick 
without fillers and up to 100 mm (four inches) thick with fillers, 
being brought to a feather edge, and being trowelled to a smooth 
finish. 

D. Primers, fillers, and reinforcement as required by manufacturer for 
application and substrate condition. 

E. Ready for use in 48 hours after application. 


2.9 MARBLE 

A. Soundness Classification in accordance with MIA Design Manual III 
Groups. 

C. Window Stools: 

1. Group A or B. 

2. Polished finish on exposed faces. 

3. Size and thickness as shown. 

2.11 WATER 

Clean, potable and free from salts and other injurious elements to 
mortar and grout materials. 

2.12 CLEANING COMPOUNDS 

A. Specifically designed for cleaning masonry and concrete and which will 
not prevent bond of subsequent tile setting materials including 
patching and leveling compounds and elastomeric waterproofing membrane 
and coat. 

B. Materials containing acid or caustic material not acceptable. 

2.13 FLOOR MORTAR BED REINFORCING 

 ASTM A185 welded wire fabric without backing, MW3 x MW3 (2 x 2-W0.5 x 
W0.5). 

2.14 POLYETHYLENE SHEET 

A. Polyethylene sheet conforming to ASTM D4397. 

B. Nominal thickness: 0.15 mm (six mils). 

C. Use sheet width to minimize joints. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 

A. Maintain ambient temperature of work areas at not less than 16 degree C 
(60 degrees F), without interruption, for not less than 24 hours before 
installation and not less than three days after installation. 

B. Maintain higher temperatures for a longer period of time where required 
by manufacturer's recommendation and ANSI Specifications for 
installation. 

C. Do not install tile when the temperature is above 38 degrees C (100 
degrees F). 

D. Do not install materials when the temperature of the substrate is below 
16 degrees C (60 degrees F). 

E. Do not allow temperature to fall below 10 degrees C (50 degrees F) 
after fourth day of completion of tile work. 


3.2 ALLOWABLE TOLERANCE 

A. Variation in plane of sub-floor, including concrete fills leveling 
compounds and mortar beds: 

1. Not more than 1 in 500 (1/4 inch in 10 feet) from required elevation 
where Portland cement mortar setting bed is used. 

2. Not more than 1 in 1000 (1/8 inch in 10 feet) where dry-set Portland 
cement, and latex-Portland cement mortar setting beds and chemicalresistant 
bond coats are used. 

B. Variation in Plane of Wall Surfaces: 

1. Not more than 1 in 400 (1/4 inch in eight feet) from required plane 
where Portland cement mortar setting bed is used. 

2. Not more than 1 in 800 (1/8 inch in eight feet) where dry-set or 
latex-Portland cement mortar or organic adhesive setting materials 
is used. 

3.3 SURFACE PREPARATION 

 

A. Cleaning New Concrete or Masonry: 

1. Chip out loose material, clean off all oil, grease dirt, adhesives, 
curing compounds, and other deterrents to bonding by mechanical 
method, or by using products specifically designed for cleaning 
concrete and masonry. 

2. Use self-contained power blast cleaning systems to remove curing 
compounds and steel trowel finish from concrete slabs where ceramic 
tile will be installed directly on concrete surface with thin-set 
materials. 

3. Steam cleaning or the use of acids and solvents for cleaning will 
not be permitted. 

B. Patching and Leveling: 

1. Mix and apply patching and leveling compound in accordance with 
manufacturer's instructions. 

2. Fill holes and cracks and align concrete floors that are out of 
required plane with patching and leveling compound. 

a. Thickness of compound as required to bring finish tile system to 
elevation shown. 

b. Float finish except finish smooth for elastomeric waterproofing. 
c. At substrate expansion, isolation, and other moving joints, 
allow joint of same width to continue through underlayment. 


3. Apply patching and leveling compound to concrete and masonry wall 
surfaces that are out of required plane. 

4. Apply leveling coats of material compatible with wall surface and 
tile setting material to wall surfaces, other than concrete and 
masonry that are out of required plane. 

C. Mortar Bed for Slopes to Drains: 

1. Slope compound to drain where drains are shown. 

2. Install mortar bed in depressed slab sloped to drains not less than 
1 in 100 (1/8 inch per foot). 

3. Allow not less than 50 mm (2 inch) depression at edge of depressed 
slab. 

4. Screed for slope to drain and float finish. 

5. Cure mortar bed for not less than seven days. Do not use curing 
compounds or coatings. 

D. Additional preparation of concrete floors for tile set with epoxy, or 
furan-resin shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's printed 
instructions. 

E. Cleavage Membrane: 

1. Install polythene sheet as cleavage membrane in depressed slab when 
waterproof membrane is not scheduled or indicated. 

2. Turn up at edge of depressed floor slab to top of floor. 

F. Walls: 

1. In showers or other wet areas cover studs with polyethylene sheet. 

2. Apply patching and leveling compound to concrete and masonry 
surfaces that are out of required plane. 

3. Apply leveling coats of material compatible with wall surface and 
tile setting material to wall surfaces, other than concrete and 
masonry that are out of required plane. 

 

4. Apply metal lath to framing in accordance with ANSI A108.1: 

a. Use fasteners specified in paragraph "Fasteners." Use washers 
when lath opening is larger than screw head. 

b. Apply scratch and leveling coats to metal lath in accordance with 
ANSI A108.1.C. 

c. Total thickness of scratch and leveling coats: 

1) Apply 9 mm to 16 mm (3/8 inch to 5/8 inch) thick over solid 
backing. 


2) 16 mm to 19 mm (5/8 to 3/4 inch) thick on metal lath over 
studs. 

3) Where wainscots are required to finish flush with wall surface 
above, adjust thickness required for flush finish. 

d. Apply scratch and leveling coats more than 19 mm (3/4 inch) thick 
in two coats. 

 

G. Existing Floors and Walls: 

1. Remove existing composition floor finishes and adhesive. Prepare 
surface by grinding, chipping, self-contained power blast cleaning 
or other suitable mechanical methods to completely expose 
uncontaminated concrete or masonry surfaces. Follow safety 
requirements of ANSI A10.20. 

2. Remove existing concrete fill or topping to structural slab. Clean 
and level the substrate for new setting bed and waterproof membrane 
or cleavage membrane. 

3. Where new tile bases are required to finish flush with plaster above 
or where they are extensions of similar bases in conjunction with 
existing floor tiles cut channel in floor slab and expose rough wall 
construction sufficiently to accommodate new tile base and setting 
material. 

3.4 CEMENTITIOUS BACKER UNITS 

A. Remove polyethylene wrapping from cementitious backer units and 
separate to allow for air circulation. Allow moisture content of backer 
units to dry down to a maximum of 35 percent before applying joint 
treatment and tile. 

B. Install in accordance with ANSI A108.1 except as specified otherwise. 

C. Install units horizontally or vertically to minimize joints with end 
joints over framing members. Units with rounded edges; face rounded 
edge away from studs to form a V joint for joint treatment. 

D. Secure cementitious backer units to each framing member with screws 
spaced not more than 200 mm (eight inches) on center and not closer 
than 13 mm (1/2 inch) from the edge of the backer unit or as 
recommended by backer unit manufacturer. Install screws so that the 
screw heads are flush with the surface of the backer unit. 

E. Where backer unit joins shower pans or waterproofing, lap backer unit 
over turned up waterproof system. Install fasteners only through top 
one-inch of turned up waterproof systems. 


F. Do not install joint treatment for seven days after installation of 
cementitious backer unit. 

G. Joint Treatment: 

1. Fill horizontal and vertical joints and corners with latex-Portland 
cement mortar. Apply fiberglass tape over joints and corners and 
embed with same mortar. 

2. Leave 6 mm (1/4 inch) space for sealant at lips of tubs, sinks, or 
other plumbing receptors. 

3.5 GLASS MAT WATER-RESISTANT GYPSUM BACKER BOARD 

A. Install in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. TCA Systems 
W245-01. 

B. Treat joints with tape and latex-Portland cement mortar or adhesive. 

3.6 MARBLE 

A. Secure thresholds and stools in position with minimum of two stainless 
steel dowels. 

B. Set in dry-set Portland cement mortar or latex-Portland cement mortar 
bond coat. 

C. Set threshold to finish 12mm (1/2 inch) above ceramic tile floor unless 
shown otherwise, with bevel edge joint top flush with adjacent floor 
similar to TCA detail TR611-02. 

3.7 METAL DIVIDER STRIPS 

A. Install metal divider strips in floor joints between ceramic and quarry 
tile floors and between tile floors and adjacent flooring of other 
materials where the finish floors are flush unless shown otherwise. 

B. Set divider strip in mortar bed to line and level centered under doors 
or in openings. 

C. At preformed sealant joint: Refer to Section 07 95 13, EXPANSION JOINT 
COVER ASSEMBLIES. 

1. Comply with recommendations in TCA "Handbook for Ceramic Tile 
Installation" Vertical and Horizontal Joint Design Essentials. TCA 
System EJ 171-02. 

a. Locate joint in tile surfaces directly above joint in sub-floor 
or where indicated when used with isolation membranes to allow 
off-setting of joint location from sub-floor joint. 

b. Fasten full length to sub-floor using a construction adhesive. 

c. Trowel setting material with full coverage over the entire leg. 

2. Set tile up against the joint ensuring that the top edge of the 
joint is flush or slightly below the top of the tile. 


3.8 CERAMIC TILE - GENERAL 

A. Comply with ANSI A108 series of tile installation standards in 
"Specifications for Installation of Ceramic Tile" applicable to methods 
of installation. 

B. Comply with TCA Installation Guidelines: 

C. Installing Mortar Beds for Floors: 

1. Install mortar bed to not damage cleavage or waterproof membrane; 32 
mm (1-1/2 inch) minimum thickness. 

2. Install floor mortar bed reinforcing centered in mortar fill. 

3. Screed finish to level plane or slope to drains where shown, float 
finish. 

4. For thin set systems cure mortar bed not less than seven days. Do 
not use curing compounds or coatings. 

5. For tile set with Portland cement paste over plastic mortar bed 
coordinate to set tile before mortar bed sets. 

D. Setting Beds or Bond Coats: 

1. Where recessed or depressed floor slabs are filled with Portland 
cement mortar bed, set ceramic mosaic floor tile in either Portland 
cement paste over plastic mortar bed or latex-Portland cement mortar 
over cured mortar bed except as specified otherwise, ANSI A108-1C, 
TCA System F121-02 or F111-02. 

2. Use quarry tile in chemical-resistant bond coat, except in floor of 
walk-in refrigerator rooms use: TCA system R 612-02. 

a. Portland cement paste over plastic mortar bed. ANSI A108.1A. 

b. Dry-set Portland cement mortar over cured mortar bed. ANSI 
A108.1B. 

3. Pools Holding Water: ANSI A108.1C. Do not use Latex Portland cement 
mortar. 

4. Set floor tile in elastomeric bond coat over elastomeric membrane 
ANSI 108. 13, TCA System F122 where scheduled, spaces and where 
shown. 

5. Set wall tile installed over concrete or masonry in dry-set Portland 
cement mortar, or latex-Portland cement mortar, ANSI 108.1B.and TCA 
System W211-02, W221-02 or W222-02. 

6. Set wall tile installed over concrete backer board in latex-Portland 
cement mortar, ANSI A108.1B. 

7. Set wall tile installed over Portland cement mortar bed on metal 
lath base in Portland cement paste over plastic mortar bed, or 


dry-set Portland cement mortar or latex-Portland cement mortar over 
a cured mortar bed, ANSI A108.1C, TCA System W231-02, W241-02. 

8. Set tile over concrete in therapeutic pools in Portland cement paste 
or dry set Portland cement mortar, ANSI A108.1C, TCA System S151-02 

9. Set tile installed over gypsum board and gypsum plaster in organic 
adhesive, ANSI A108.1, TCA System W242-02. 

10. Set trim shapes in same material specified for setting adjoining 
tile. 

E. Workmanship: 

1. Lay out tile work so that no tile less than one-half full size is 
used. Make all cuts on the outer edge of the field. Align new tile 
work scheduled for existing spaces to the existing tile work unless 
specified otherwise. 

2. Set tile firmly in place with finish surfaces in true planes. Align 
tile flush with adjacent tile unless shown otherwise. 

3. Form intersections and returns accurately. 

4. Cut and drill tile neatly without marring surface. 

5. Cut edges of tile abutting penetrations, finish, or built-in items: 

a. Fit tile closely around electrical outlets, piping, fixtures and 
fittings, so that plates, escutcheons, collars and flanges will 
overlap cut edge of tile. 

b. Seal tile joints water tight as specified in Section 07 92 00, 
JOINT SEALANTS, around electrical outlets, piping fixtures and 
fittings before cover plates and escutcheons are set in place. 

6. Completed work shall be free from hollow sounding areas and loose, 
cracked or defective tile. 

7. Remove and reset tiles that are out of plane or misaligned. 

8. Floors: 

a. Extend floor tile beneath casework and equipment, except those 
units mounted in wall recesses. 

b. Align finish surface of new tile work flush with other and 
existing adjoining floor finish where shown. 

c. In areas where floor drains occur, slope to drains where shown. 

d. Shove and vibrate tiles over 200 mm (8 inches) square to achieve 
full support of bond coat. 


9. Walls: 

a. Cover walls and partitions, including pilasters, furred areas, 
and freestanding columns from floor to ceiling, or from floor to 
nominal wainscot heights shown with tile. 

b. Finish reveals of openings with tile, except where other finish 
materials are shown or specified. 

c. At window openings, provide tile stools and reveals, except where 
other finish materials are shown or specified. 

d. Finish wall surfaces behind and at sides of casework and 
equipment, except those units mounted in wall recesses, with same 
tile as scheduled for room proper. 

10. Joints: 

a. Keep all joints in line, straight, level, perpendicular and of 
even width unless shown otherwise. 

b. Make joints 2 mm (1/16 inch) wide for glazed wall tile and mosaic 
tile work. 

c. Make joints in quarry tile work not less than 6 mm (1/4 inch) nor 
more than 9 mm (3/8 inch) wide. Finish joints flush with surface 
of tile. 

d. Make joints in Paver tile, porcelain type; maximum 3 mm (1/8 
inch) wide. 

11. Back Buttering: For installations indicated below, obtain 100 
percent mortar coverage by complying with applicable special 
requirements for back buttering of tile in referenced ANSI A108 
series of tile installation standards: 

a. Tile wall installations in wet areas, including showers, tub 
enclosures, laundries and swimming pools. 

b. Tile installed with chemical-resistant mortars and grouts. 

c. Tile wall installations composed of tiles 200 by 200 mm (8 by 8 
inches or larger. 

d. Exterior tile wall installations. 

3.9 CERAMIC TILE INSTALLED WITH PORTLAND CEMENT MORTAR 

A. Mortar Mixes for Floor, Wall and Base Tile (including Showers,): ANSI 
A108.1.except specified otherwise. 

B. Installing Wall and Base Tile: ANSI A108.1, except specified otherwise. 

C. Installing Floor Tile: ANSI A108.1, except as specified otherwise. 
Slope mortar beds to floor drains a minimum of 1 in 100 (1/8 inch per 
foot). 


3.10 PORCELAIN TILE INSTALLED WITH LATEX PORTLAND CEMENT BONDING MORTAR 

Due to the denseness of porcelain tile use latex Portland cement 
bonding mortar that meets the requirements of ANSI A108.1.Bonding 
mortars shall be mixed in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. 
Improper liquid ratios and dwell time before placement of bonding 
mortar and tile shall affect bond. 

 

3.15 GROUTING 

A. Grout Type and Location: 

1. Grout for glazed wall and base tile, paver tile and unglazed mosaic 
tile except for therapeutic pool shall be Epoxy Grout. 

B. Workmanship: 

1. Install and cure grout in accordance with the applicable standard. 

3. Epoxy Grout: ANSI A108.1. 

3.16 MOVEMENT JOINTS 

A. Prepare tile expansion, isolation, construction and contraction joints 
for installation of sealant. Refer to Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

B. TCA details EJ 171-02. 

C. At expansion joints, rake out joint full depth of tile and setting bed 
and mortar bed. Do not cut waterproof or isolation membrane. 

D. Rake out grout at joints between tile, tub, service sink, at toe of 
base, and where shown not less than 6 mm (1/4 inch) deep. 

3.17 CLEANING 

A. Thoroughly sponge and wash tile. Polish glazed surfaces with clean dry 
cloths. 

B. Methods and materials used shall not damage or impair appearance of 
tile surfaces. 

C. The use of acid or acid cleaners on glazed tile surfaces is prohibited. 

D. Clean tile grouted with epoxy grout and tile set in elastomeric bond 
coat as recommended by the manufacturer of the grout and bond coat. 

3.18 PROTECTION 

A. Keep traffic off tile floor, until grout and setting material is firmly 
set and cured. 

B. Where traffic occurs over tile floor, cover tile floor with not less 
than 9 mm (3/8 inch) thick plywood, wood particle board, or hardboard 
securely taped in place. Do not remove protective cover until time for 
final inspection. Clean tile of any tape, adhesive and stains. 


3.19 TESTING FINISH FLOOR 

A. Test floors in accordance with ASTM C627 to show compliance with codes 
1 through 10. 

B. Test kitchen and storage rooms. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 09 51 00 
ACOUSTICAL CEILINGS 

PART 1- GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Metal ceiling suspension system for acoustical ceilings. 

B. Acoustical units. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Color, pattern, and location of each type of acoustical unit: 

 Drawings. 

B. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 SUBMITTAL 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Samples: 

1. Acoustical units, each type, with label indicating conformance to 
specification requirements, including units specified to match 
existing. 

2. Colored markers for units providing access. 

C. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Ceiling suspension system, each type, showing complete details of 
installation. 

2. Acoustical units, each type 

D. Manufacturer's Certificates: Acoustical units, each type, in accordance 
with specification requirements. 

1.4 DEFINITIONS 

A. Standard definitions as defined in ASTM C634. 

B. Terminology as defined in ASTM E1264. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by basic 
designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A641/A641M-09...........Zinc-coated (Galvanized) Carbon Steel Wire 

A653/A653M-11...........Steel Sheet, Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) or Zinc- 
Iron Alloy-coated (Galvannealed) by the Hot-Dip 
Process 

C423-09.................Sound Absorption and Sound Absorption 
Coefficients by the Reverberation Room Method 

C634-11.................Standard Terminology Relating to Environmental 
Acoustics 


C635-13.................Metal Suspension Systems for Acoustical Tile and 
Lay-in Panel Ceilings 

C636-13.................Installation of Metal Ceiling Suspension Systems 
for Acoustical Tile and Lay-in Panels 

E84-13..................Surface Burning Characteristics of Building 
Materials 

E119-12.................Fire Tests of Building Construction and 
Materials 

E413-10.................Classification for Rating Sound Insulation. 

E580-11.................Application of Ceiling Suspension Systems for 
Acoustical Tile and Lay-in Panels in Areas 
Requiring Seismic Restraint 

E1264-08e1..............Classification for Acoustical Ceiling Products 

C. International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 

ISO 14644-1.............Classification of Air Cleanliness 

PART 2- PRODUCTS 

2.1 METAL SUSPENSION SYSTEM 

A. ASTM C635, heavy-duty system, except as otherwise specified. 

1. Ceiling suspension system members shall be galvanized cold-rolled 
steel, bonderized. 

2. Use same construction for cross runners as main runners. Use of 
lighter-duty sections for cross runners is not acceptable. 

B. Exposed grid suspension system for support of lay-in panels: 

1. Exposed grid width not less than 22 mm (7/8 inch) with not less than 
8 mm (5/16 inch) panel bearing surface. 

2. Fabricate wall molding and other special molding from the same 
material with same exposed width and finish as the exposed grid 
members. 

3. On exposed metal surfaces apply baked-on enamel flat texture finish 
in color to match adjacent acoustical units unless specified 
otherwise . 

2.2 PERIMETER SEAL 

A. Vinyl, polyethylene or polyurethane open cell sponge material having 
density of 1.3 plus or minus 10 percent, compression set less than 10 
percent with pressure sensitive adhesive coating on one side. 

B. Thickness as required to fill voids between back of wall molding and 
finish wall. 

C. Not less than 9 mm (3/8 inch) wide strip. 

2.3 WIRE 

A. ASTM A641. 


B. For wire hangers: Minimum diameter 2.68 mm (0.1055 inch). 

C. For bracing wires: Minimum diameter 3.43 mm (0.1350 inch). 

2.4 ANCHORS AND INSERTS 

A. Use anchors or inserts to support twice the loads imposed by hangers 
attached thereto. 

B. Hanger Inserts: 

1. Fabricate inserts from steel, zinc-coated (galvanized after 
fabrication). 

2. Nailing type option for wood forms: 

a. Upper portion designed for anchorage in concrete and positioning 
lower portion below surface of concrete approximately 25 mm (one 
inch). 

b. Lower portion provided with not less than 8 mm (5/16 inch) hole to 
permit attachment of hangers. 

3. Flush ceiling insert type: 

a. Designed to provide a shell covered opening over a wire loop to 
permit attachment of hangers and keep concrete out of insert 
recess. 

b. Insert opening inside shell approximately 16 mm (5/8 inch) wide by 
9 mm (3/8 inch) high over top of wire. 

c. Wire 5 mm (3/16 inch) diameter with length to provide positive 
hooked anchorage in concrete. 

C. Clips: 

1. Galvanized steel. 

2. Designed to clamp to steel beam or bar joists, or secure framing 
member together. 

3. Designed to rigidly secure framing members together. 

4. Designed to sustain twice the loads imposed by hangers or items 
supported. 

2.5 CARRYING CHANNELS FOR SECONDARY FRAMING 

D. Fabricate from cold-rolled or hot-rolled steel, black asphaltic paint 
finish, free of rust. 

E. Weighing not less than the following, per 300 m (per thousand linear 
feet): 

Size mm 

Size 

Inches 

Cold-rolled 

Kg Pound 

Hot-rolled 

Kg Pound 

38 

1 1/2 

215.4 475 

508 1120 

50 

2 

267.6 590 

571.5 1260 



 


 2.6 ACOUSTICAL UNITS 

A. General: 

1. Ceiling Tile shall meet minimum 37% bio-based content in accordance 
with USDA Bio-Preferred Product requirements. 

2. ASTM E1264, weighing 3.6 kg/m2 (3/4 psf) minimum for glass fiber 
panels or tile. 

3. Class A Flame Spread: ASTM 84 

4. Minimum NRC (Noise Reduction Coefficient): 0.90 unless specified 
otherwise: ASTM C423. 

5. Manufacturers standard finish, minimum Light Reflectance (LR) 
coefficient of 0.75 on the exposed surfaces . 

6. Lay-in panels: Sizes as shown, with square edges. 

B. Type III Units - Mineral base with water-based painted finish less than 
10 g/l VOC, Form 2 - Water felted, minimum 16 mm (5/8 inch) thick. 
Mineral base to contain minimum 65 percent recycled content. 

1. Follow existing facility standard: Armstrong Cortega only. 

C. Type XII Units: Glass fiber units with painted finish. 

1. Minimum thickness of 25 mm (1 inches). 

2.7 ACCESS IDENTIFICATION 

A. Markers: 

1. Use colored markers with pressure sensitive adhesive on one side. 

2. Make colored markers of paper of plastic, 6 to 9 mm (1/4 to 3/8 inch) 
in diameter. 

B. Use markers of the same diameter throughout building. 

C. Color Code: Use following color markers for service identification: 

Color...................Service 

Red.....................Sprinkler System: Valves and Controls 

Green...................Domestic Water: Valves and Controls 

Yellow..................Chilled Water and Heating Water 

Orange..................Ductwork: Fire Dampers 

Blue....................Ductwork: Dampers and Controls 

Black...................Gas: Laboratory, Medical, Air and Vacuum 

PART 3 EXECUTION 

3.1 CEILING TREATMENT 

A. Treatment of ceilings shall include sides and soffits of ceiling beams, 
furred work 600 mm (24 inches) wide and over, and vertical surfaces at 
changes in ceiling heights unless otherwise shown. Install acoustic 
tiles after wet finishes have been installed and solvents have cured. 

B. Lay out acoustical units symmetrically about center lines of each room 
or space unless shown otherwise on reflected ceiling plan. 


C. Moldings: 

1. Install metal wall molding at perimeter of room, column, or edge at 
vertical surfaces. 

2. Install special shaped molding at changes in ceiling heights and at 
other breaks in ceiling construction to support acoustical units and 
to conceal their edges. 

D. Perimeter Seal: 

1. Install perimeter seal between vertical leg of wall molding and 
finish wall, partition, and other vertical surfaces. 

2. Install perimeter seal to finish flush with exposed faces of 
horizontal legs of wall molding. 

E. Existing ceiling: 

1. Where extension of existing ceilings occur, match existing. 

2. Where acoustical units are salvaged and reinstalled or joined, use 
salvaged units within a space. Do not mix new and salvaged units 
within a space which results in contrast between old and new acoustic 
units. 

3. Comply with specifications for new acoustical units for new units 
required to match appearance of existing units. 

3.2 CEILING SUSPENSION SYSTEM INSTALLATION 

A. General: 

1. Install metal suspension system for acoustical tile and lay-in panels 
in accordance with ASTM C636, except as specified otherwise. 

2. Use direct or indirect hung suspension system or combination thereof 
as defined in ASTM C635. 

3. Support a maximum area of 1.48 m2 (16 sf) of ceiling per hanger. 

4. Prevent deflection in excess of 1/360 of span of cross runner and 
main runner. 

5. Provide extra hangers, minimum of one hanger at each corner of each 
item of mechanical, electrical and miscellaneous equipment supported 
by ceiling suspension system not having separate support or hangers. 

6. Provide not less than 100 mm (4 inch) clearance from the exposed face 
of the acoustical units to the underside of ducts, pipe, conduit, 
secondary suspension channels, concrete beams or joists; and steel 
beam or bar joist unless furred system is shown, 

7. Use main runners not less than 1200 mm (48 inches) in length. 

8. Install hanger wires vertically. Angled wires are not acceptable 
except for seismic restraint bracing wires. 

B. Anchorage to Structure: 

1. Concrete: 


a. Install hanger inserts and wire loops required for support of 
hanger and bracing wire in concrete forms before concrete is 
placed. Install hanger wires with looped ends through steel deck 
if steel deck does not have attachment device. 

b. Use eye pins or threaded studs with screw-on eyes in existing or 
already placed concrete structures to support hanger and bracing 
wire. Install in sides of concrete beams or joists at mid height. 

2. Steel: 

a. When steel framing does not permit installation of hanger wires at 
spacing required, install carrying channels for attachment of 
hanger wires. 

(1) Size and space carrying channels to insure that the maximum 
deflection specified will not be exceeded. 

(2) Attach hangers to steel carrying channels, spaced four feet on 
center, unless area supported or deflection exceeds the amount 
specified. 

b. Attach carrying channels to the bottom flange of steel beams 
spaced not 1200 mm (4 feet) on center before fire proofing is 
installed. Weld or use steel clips to attach to beam to develop 
full strength of carrying channel. 

c. Attach hangers to bottom chord of bar joists or to carrying 
channels installed between the bar joists when hanger spacing 
prevents anchorage to joist. Rest carrying channels on top of the 
bottom chord of the bar joists, and securely wire tie or clip to 
joist. 

C. Direct Hung Suspension System: 

1. As illustrated in ASTM C635. 

2. Support main runners by hanger wires attached directly to the 
structure overhead. 

3. Maximum spacing of hangers, 1200 mm (4 feet) on centers unless 
interference occurs by mechanical systems. Use indirect hung 
suspension system where not possible to maintain hanger spacing. 

D. Indirect Hung Suspension System: 

1. As illustrated in ASTM C635. 

2. Space carrying channels for indirect hung suspension system not more 
than 1200 mm (4 feet) on center. Space hangers for carrying channels 
not more than 2400 mm (8 feet) on center or for carrying channels 
less than 1200 mm (4 feet) or center so as to insure that specified 
requirements are not exceeded. 

3. Support main runners by specially designed clips attached to carrying 
channels. 


E. Seismic Ceiling Bracing System: 

1. Construct system is accordance with ASTM E580. 

2. Connect bracing wires to structure above as specified for anchorage 
to structure and to main runner or carrying channels of suspended 
ceiling at bottom. 

3.3 ACOUSTICAL UNIT INSTALLATION 

A. Cut acoustic units for perimeter borders and penetrations to fit tight 
against penetration for joint not concealed by molding. 

B. Install lay-in acoustic panels in exposed grid with not less than 6 mm 
(1/4 inch) bearing at edges on supports. 

1. Install tile to lay level and in full contact with exposed grid. 

2. Replace cracked, broken, stained, dirty, or tile not cut for minimum 
bearing. 

C. Tile in concealed grid upward access suspension system: 

1. Install acoustical tile with joints close, straight and true to line, 
and with exposed surfaces level and flush at joints. 

2. Make corners and arises full, and without worn or broken places. 

3. Locate acoustical units providing access as specified under Article, 
ACCESS. 

D. Adhesive applied tile: 

1. Condition of surface shall be in accordance with ASTM D1779, Note 1, 
Cleanliness of Surface, and Note 4, Rigidity of Base Surface. 

2. Size or seal surface as recommended by manufacturer of adhesive and 
allow to dry before installing units. 

E. Markers: 

1. Install markers of color code specified to identify the various 
concealed piping, mechanical, and plumbing systems. 

2. Attach colored markers to exposed grid on opposite sides of the units 
providing access. 

3. Attach marker on exposed ceiling surface of upward access acoustical 
unit. 

3.4 CLEAN-UP AND COMPLETION 

A. Replace damaged, discolored, dirty, cracked and broken acoustical units. 

B. Leave finished work free from defects. 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 09 65 13 
RESILIENT BASE AND ACCESSORIES 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies the installation of vinyl or rubber base and 
resilient stair treads with sheet rubber flooring on landings. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Color and texture: Section 09 06 00, SCHEDULE FOR FINISHESS. 

B. Integral base with sheet flooring: Section 09 65 16, RESILIENT SHEET 
FLOORING. 

C. Reference Section 01 18 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Description of each product. 

2. Base and stair material manufacturer's recommendations for adhesives. 

3. Application and installation instructions. 

C. Samples: 

1. Base: 150 mm (6 inches) long, each type and color. 

2. Resilient Stair Treads: 150 mm (6 inches) long. 

4. Adhesive: Literature indicating each type. 

1.4 DELIVERY 

A. Deliver materials to the site in original sealed packages or containers, 
clearly marked with the manufacturer's name or brand, type and color, 
production run number and date of manufacture. 

B. Materials from containers which have been distorted, damaged or opened 
prior to installation will be rejected. 

1.5 STORAGE 

A. Store materials in weather tight and dry storage facility. 

B. Protect material from damage by handling and construction operations 
before, during, and after installation. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publication listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

F1861-08................Resilient Wall Base 

C. Federal Specifications (Fed. Spec.): 


RR-T-650E...............Treads, Metallic and Non-Metallic, Nonskid 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 GENERAL 

 Use only products by the same manufacturer and from the same production 
run. 

 

2.2 RESILIENT BASE 

A. ASTM F1861, 3 mm (1/8 inch) thick, 100 mm (4 inches) high, 
Thermoplastics, Group 2-layered. Style B-cove. 

C. Use only one type of base throughout. 

2.3 RESILIENT TREADS 

A. Fed. Spec. RR-T-650, Composition A, Type 2, 5 mm (3/16 inch) thick on 
wear surface tapering to 3 mm (1/8 inch) thick at riser end. 

B. Nosing shape to conform to sub-tread nosing shape. 

2.5 PRIMER (FOR CONCRETE FLOORS) 

 As recommended by the adhesive and tile manufacturer. 

2.6 LEVELING COMPOUND (FOR CONCRETE FLOORS) 

 Provide products with latex or polyvinyl acetate resins in the mix. 

2.7 ADHESIVES 

A. Use products recommended by the material manufacturer for the conditions 
of use. 

B. Use low-VOC adhesive during installation. Water based adhesive with low 
VOC is preferred over solvent based adhesive. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 PROJECT CONDITIONS 

A. Maintain temperature of materials above 21o C (70 .F), for 48 hours 
before installation. 

B. Maintain temperature of rooms where work occurs, between 21o C and 27o C 
(70oF and 80oF) for at least 48 hours, before, during, and after 
installation. 

C. Do not install materials until building is permanently enclosed and wet 
construction is complete, dry, and cured. 

3.2 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS 

A. The respective manufacturer's instructions for application and 
installation will be considered for use when approved by the Resident 
Engineer. 

B. Submit proposed installation deviation from this specification to the 
Resident Engineer indicating the differences in the method of 
installation. 


C. The Resident Engineer reserves the right to have test portions of 
material installation removed to check for non-uniform adhesion and 
spotty adhesive coverage. 

3.3 PREPARATION 

A. Examine surfaces on which material is to be installed. 

B. Fill cracks, pits, and dents with leveling compound. 

C. Level to 3 mm (1/8 inch) maximum variations. 

D. Do not use adhesive for leveling or filling. 

E. Grind, sand, or cut away protrusions; grind high spots. 

F. Clean substrate area of oil, grease, dust, paint, and deleterious 
substances. 

G. Substrate area dry and cured. Perform manufacturer’s recommended bond 
and moisture test. 

H. Preparation of existing installation: 

1. Remove existing base and stair treads including adhesive. 

2. Do not use solvents to remove adhesives. 

3. Prepare substrate as specified. 

3.4 BASE INSTALLATION 

A. Location: 

1. Unless otherwise specified or shown, where base is scheduled, install 
base over toe space of base of casework, lockers, laboratory, 
pharmacy furniture island cabinets and where other equipment occurs. 

2. Extend base scheduled for room into adjacent closet, alcoves, and 
around columns. 

B. Application: 

1. Apply adhesive uniformly with no bare spots. 

2. Set base with joints aligned and butted to touch for entire height. 

3. Before starting installation, layout base material to provide the 
minimum number of joints with no strip less than 600 mm (24 inches) 
length. 

a. Short pieces to save material will not be permitted. 

b. Locate joints as remote from corners as the material lengths or 
the wall configuration will permit. 

C. Form corners and end stops as follows: 

1. Score back of outside corner. 

2. Score face of inside corner and notch cove. 

D. Roll base for complete adhesion. 

3.5 STAIR TREAD INSTALLATION 

A. Prepare surfaces to receive the treads in accordance with applicable 
portions of paragraph, preparation. 

B. Layout of Treads. 


1. No joints will be accepted in treads., 

2. Set full treads on intermediate and floor landings. 

C. Application: 

1. Apply adhesive uniformly with no bare spots. 

2. Roll and pound treads to assure adhesion. 

3.7 CLEANING AND PROTECTION 

A. Clean all exposed surfaces of base and adjoining areas of adhesive 
spatter before it sets. 

B. Keep traffic off resilient material for at least 72 hours after 
installation. 

C. Clean and polish materials in the following order: 

1. After two weeks, scrub resilient base, sheet rubber and treads 
materials with a minimum amount of water and a mild detergent. Leave 
surfaces clean and free of detergent residue. Polish resilient base 
to a gloss finish. 

2. Do not polish tread and sheet rubber materials. 

D. When construction traffic is anticipated, cover tread materials with 
reinforced kraft paper and plywood or hardboard properly secured and 
maintained until removal is directed by the Resident Engineer. 

E. Where protective materials are removed and immediately prior to 
acceptance, replace damaged materials and re-clean resilient materials. 
Damaged materials are defined as having cuts, gouges, scrapes or tears 
and not fully adhered. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 09 65 16 
RESILIENT SHEET FLOORING 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This Section specifies the installation of sheet flooring with backing 
and integral cove base. 

B. Grades of resilient sheet vinyl floor covering without backing having 
vinyl plastic wearlayer with backing. 

C. Installation of sheet flooring including following: 

1. Heat welded seams. 

2. Integral cove base: Installed at intersection of floor and vertical 
surfaces. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Concrete floors: Section 03 30 00, CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE. 

B. Color, pattern and texture: Section 09 06 00, SCHEDULE FOR FINISHES. 

C. Resilient base required over metal base of casework: Section 12 31 00, 
MANUFACTURED METAL CASEWORK. 

D. Resilient base over base of lockers, equipment and casework: Section 09 
65 13, RESILIENT BASE AND ACCESSORIES. 

E. Unbacked vinyl (homogenous) sheet flooring with welded seams: Section 09 
65 16, RESILIENT SHEET FLOORING. 

F. Reference Section – 01 18 11 SUSTAINABLE DSIGN REQUIREMENTS 

1.3 QUALITY CONTROL-QUALIFICATIONS: 

A. The Contracting Officer shall approve products or service of proposed 
manufacturer, suppliers, and installers, and the Contractor shall submit 
certification that: 

1. Heat welded seaming is manufacturer's prescribed method of 
installation. 

2. Installer is approved by manufacturer of materials and has technical 
qualifications, experience, trained personnel, and facilities to 
install specified items. 

3. Manufacturer's product submitted has been in satisfactory operation, 
on three installations similar and equivalent in size to this project 
for three years. Submit list of installations. 

B. The sheet vinyl floor coverings shall meet fire performance 
characteristics as determined by testing products, per ASTM test method, 
indicated below by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL) or another 
recognized testing and inspecting agency acceptable to authorities 
having jurisdiction. 


1. Critical Radiant Flux: 0.45 watts per sq. cm or more, Class I, per 
ASTM E648. 

2. Smoke Density: Less than 450 per ASTM E662. 

C. The floor covering manufacturer shall certify that products supplied for 
installation comply with local regulations controlling use of volatile 
organic compounds (VOC’s). 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. In accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND 
SAMPLES, submit following: 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Description of resilient material and accessories to be provided. 

2. Resilient material manufacturer's recommendations for adhesives, weld 
rods, sealants, and underlayment. 

3. Application and installation instructions. 

C. Samples: 

1. Sheet material, 38 mm by 300 mm (1-1/2 inch by 12 inch), of each 
color and pattern with a welded seam using proposed welding rod 300 
mm (12 inches) square for each type, pattern and color. 

2. Cap strip and fillet strip, 300 mm (12 inches) for integral base. 

3. Shop Drawings and Certificates: Layout of joints showing patterns 
where joints are expressed, and type and location of obscure type 
joints. Indicate orientation of directional patterns. 

4. Certificates: Quality Control Certificate Submittals and lists 
specified in paragraph, QUALIFICATIONS. 

5. Edge strips: 150 mm (6 inches) long each type. 

6. Adhesive, underlayment and primer: Pint container, each type. 

1.5 PROJECT CONDITIONS 

A. Maintain temperature of floor materials and room, where work occurs, 
above 18 . C (65 .F) and below 38 .C (100 .F) for 48 hours before, during 
and for 48 hours after installation. After above period, room 
temperature shall not fall below 13 .C (55 .F). 

B. Construction in or near areas to receive flooring work shall be 
complete, dry and cured. Do not install resilient flooring over slabs 
until they have been cured and are sufficiently dry to achieve a bond 
with adhesive. Follow flooring manufacturer’s recommendations for bond 
and moisture testing. 

C. Building shall be permanently enclosed. Schedule construction so that 
floor receives no construction traffic when completed. 


1.6 DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 

A. Deliver materials to site in original sealed packages or containers; 
labeled for identification with manufacturer's name and brand. 

B. Deliver sheet flooring full width roll, completely enclosed in factory 
wrap, clearly marked with the manufacturer's number, type and color, 
production run number and manufacture date. 

C. Store materials in weathertight and dry storage facility. Protect from 
damage due to handling, weather, and construction operations before, 
during and after installation. Store sheet flooring on end with ambient 
temperatures maintained as recommended by manufacturer. 

D. Store sheet flooring on end. 

E. Move sheet vinyl floor coverings and installation accessories into 
spaces where they will be installed at least 48 hours in advance of 
installation. 

1.7 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in text by basic designation 
only. 

B. American Society For Testing Materials (ASTM): 

E648-10.................Critical Radiant Flux of Floor-Covering Systems 
Using a Radiant Energy Source. 

E662-12.................Specific Optical Density of Smoke Generated by 
Solid Materials. 

F710-08.................Practice for Preparing Concrete Floors and Other 
Monolithic Floors to Receive Resilient Flooring. 

F1303-04(2009)..........Sheet Vinyl Floor Covering with Backing. 

F1869-10................Moisture Vapor Emission Rate of Concrete 
Subfloor using Anhydrous Calcium Chloride 

F1913-04(2010)..........Sheet Vinyl Flooring without Backing 

F2170-09................Determining Relative Humidity in Concrete Floor 
Slabs using In-situ Probes 

C. Resilient Floor Covering Institute (RFCI): 

 Recommended Work Practices for Removal of Resilient Floor Coverings. 

1.8 SCHEDULING 

 Interior finish work such as plastering, drywall finishing, concrete, 
terrazzo, ceiling work, and painting work shall be complete and dry 
before installation. Mechanical, electrical, and other work above 
ceiling line shall be completed. Heating, ventilating, and air 
conditioning systems shall be installed and operating in order to 
maintain temperature and humidity requirements. 


1.9 WARRANTY: 

 Submit written warranty, in accordance with FAR clause 52.246-21, 
Warranty of Construction requirements except that warranty period shall 
be extended to include two (2) years. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

 

2.1 SHEET VINYL FLOOR COVERINGS 

A. Sheet Vinyl Floor Coverings: Smooth face, minimum thickness nominal 

2 mm (0.08 inch). Sheet flooring shall conform to ASTM F1913 and 
material requirements specified in ASTM F1303, Type II, Grade 1, backing 
classification not applicable. Foam backed sheet flooring is not 
acceptable. 

B. Size: Provide maximum size sheet vinyl material produced by manufacturer 
to provide minimum number of joints. Minimum size width acceptable - 
1200 mm (48 inches). 

C. Each color and pattern of sheet flooring shall be of same production 
run. 

2.2 WELDING ROD: 

 Product of floor covering manufacturer in color shall match field color 
of sheet vinyl covering. 

2.3 APPLICATION MATERIALS AND ACCESSORIES 

A. Floor and Base Adhesive: Type recommended by sheet flooring material 
manufacturer for conditions of use. 

B. Mastic Underlayment (for concrete floors): Provide products with latex 
or polyvinyl acetate resins in mix. Condition to be corrected shall 
determine type of underlayment selected for use. 

C. Base Accessories: 

1. Fillet Strip: 19 mm (3/4 inch) radius fillet strip compatible with 
resilient sheet material. 

2. Cap Strip: Extruded flanged zero edge vinyl reducer strip 
approximately 25 mm (one inch) exposed height with 13 mm (1/2 inch) 
flange. 

2.4 SHEET FLOORING 

A. ASTM F1303, Type II, Grade 1, except for backing requirements. Foam 
backed sheet flooring is not acceptable. 

B. Minimum nominal thickness 2 mm (0.08 inch); 1800 mm (6 ft) minimum 
width. 

C. Critical Radiant Flux: 0.45 watts per sq.cm or more, Class I, per ASTM 
E648. 

D. Smoke density: less than 450 per ASTM E662. 

E. Color and pattern of sheet flooring of the same production run. 


2.5 ADHESIVES 

 Water resistant type recommended by the sheet flooring manufacturer for 
the conditions of use. VOC not to exceed 50g/L 

2.6 BASE CAP STRIP AND COVE STRIP 

A. Extruded vinyl compatible with the sheet flooring. 

B. Cap strip "J" shape with feathered edge flange approximately 25 mm (one 
inch) wide; top designed to receive sheet flooring with 13 mm (1/2 inch) 
flange lapping top of flooring 

C. Cove strip 70 mm (2-3/4 inch) radius. 

2.7 LEVELING COMPOUND (FOR CONCRETE FLOORS) 

 Provide cementitious products with latex or polyvinyl acetate resins in 
the mix. 

2.8 PRIMER (FOR CONCRETE SUBFLOORS) 

 As recommended by the adhesive or sheet flooring manufacturer. 

2.9 EDGE STRIPS 

A. Extruded aluminum, mill finish, mechanically cleaned. 

B. 6 mm (1/4 inch) thick, bevel one edge to 3 mm (1/8 inch) thick. 

C. Drill and counter sink edge strips for flat head screws. Space holes 
near ends and approximately 225 mm (9 inches) on center in between. 

2.10 SEALANT 

A. As specified in Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

B. Compatible with sheet flooring. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 PROJECT CONDITIONS 

A. Maintain temperature of sheet flooring above 36 .C (65 .F), for 48 hours 
before installation. 

B. Maintain temperature of rooms where sheet flooring work occurs above 

36 .C (65 .F), for 48 hours, before installation and during 
installation. 

C. After installation, maintain temperature at or above 36 .C (65 .F.) 

D. Building is permanently enclosed. 

E. Wet construction in or near areas to receive sheet flooring is complete, 
dry and cured. 

3.2 SUBFLOOR PREPARATION 

A. Concrete Subfloors: Verify that concrete slabs comply with ASTM F710. 

1. Installer shall examine surfaces on which resilient sheet flooring is 
to be installed, and shall advise Contractor, in writing, of areas 
which are unacceptable for installation of flooring material. 
Installer shall advise Contractor which methods are to be used to 


correct conditions that will impair proper installation. Installation 
shall not proceed until unsatisfactory conditions have been 
corrected. 

2. Slab substrates dry, free of curing compounds, sealers, hardeners, 
and other materials which would interfere with bonding of adhesive. 
Determine adhesion and dryness characteristics by performing bond and 
moisture tests recommended by Resilient Floor Covering Institute 
recommendations in manual RFCI-MRP. 

B. Broom or vacuum clean substrates to be covered by sheet vinyl floor 
coverings immediately before installation. Following cleaning, examine 
substrates to determine if there is visually any evidence of moisture, 
alkaline salts, carbonation, or dust. 

C. Primer: If recommended by flooring manufacturer, prior to application of 
adhesive, apply concrete slab primer in accordance with manufacturer’s 
directions. 

D. Correct conditions which will impair proper installation, including 
trowel marks, pits, dents, protrusions, cracks or joints. 

E. Fill cracks, joints, depressions, and other irregularities in concrete 
with leveling compound. 

1. Do not use adhesive for filling or leveling purposes. 

2. Do not use leveling compound to correct imperfections which can be 
corrected by spot grinding. 

3. Trowel to smooth surface free of trowel marks, pits, dents, 
protrusions, cracks or joint lines. 

F. Clean floor of oil, paint, dust and deleterious substances. Leave floor 
dry and cured free of residue from existing curing or cleaning agents. 

G. Moisture Testing: Perform moisture and pH test as recommended by the 
flooring and adhesive manufacturers. Perform test locations starting on 
the deepest part of the concrete structure. Proceed with installation 
only after concrete substrates meet or exceed the manufacturer’s 
requirements. In the absence of specific guidance from the flooring or 
adhesive manufacturer the following requirements are to be met: 

1. Perform moisture vapor emission tests in accordance with ASTM F1869. 
Proceed with installation only after substrates have a maximum 
moisture-vapor-emission rate of 1.36 kg of water/92.9 sq. m (3lb of 
water/1000 sq. ft.) in 24 hours. 

2. Perform concrete internal relative humidity testing using situ probes 
in accordance with ASTM F2170. Proceed with installation only after 
concrete reaches maximum 75 percent relative humidity level 
measurement. 


H. Preparation shall include the removal of existing resilient floor and 
existing adhesive. Do not use solvents to remove adhesives. Coordinate 
with Asbestos Abatement Section if asbestos abatement procedures will be 
involved. 

 

I. Remove existing resilient flooring and adhesive completely in accordance 
with Resilient Floor Covering Institute recommendations in manual RFCIWP. 
Solvents shall not be used. 

3.3 INSTALLATION OF FLOORING 

A. Install work in strict compliance with manufacturer's instructions and 
approved layout drawings. 

B. Maintain uniformity of sheet vinyl floor covering direction and avoid 
cross seams. 

C. Arrange for a minimum number of seams and place them in inconspicuous 
and low traffic areas, but in no case less than 150 mm (6 inches) away 
from parallel joints in flooring substrates. 

D. Match edges of resilient floor coverings for color shading and pattern 
at seams. 

E. Where resilient sheet flooring abuts other flooring material floors 
shall finish level. 

F. Extend sheet vinyl floor coverings into toe spaces, door reveals, 
closets, and similar openings. 

G. Inform the Resident Engineer of conflicts between this section and the 
manufacturer's instructions or recommendations for auxiliary materials, 
or installation methods, before proceeding. 

H. Install sheet in full coverage adhesives. 

1. Air pockets or loose edges will not be accepted. 

2. Trim sheet materials to touch in the length of intersection at pipes 
and vertical projections; seal joints at pipe with waterproof cement 
or sealant. 

I. Keep joints to a minimum; avoid small filler pieces or strips. 

J. Follow manufacturer’s recommendations for seams at butt joints. Do not 
leave any open joints that would be readily visible from a standing 
position. 

K. Follow manufacturer’s recommendations regarding pattern match, if 
applicable. 

L. Installation of Edge Strips: 

1. Locate edge strips under center lines of doors unless otherwise 
indicated. 

2. Set aluminum strips in adhesive, anchor with lead anchors and 
stainless steel Phillips screws. 


M. Integral Cove Base Installation: 

1. Set preformed fillet strip to receive base. 

2. Install the base with adhesive, terminate expose edge with the cap 
strip. 

3. Form internal and external corners to the geometric shape generated 
by the cove at either straight or radius corners. 

4. Solvent weld joints as specified for the flooring. Seal cap strip to 
wall with an adhesive type sealant. 

5. Unless otherwise specified or shown where sheet flooring is 
scheduled, provide integral base at intersection of floor and 
vertical surfaces. Provide sheet flooring and base scheduled for room 
on floors and walls under and behind areas where casework, laboratory 
and pharmacy furniture and other equipment occurs, except where 
mounted in wall recesses. 

3.4 INSTALLATION OF INTEGRAL COVED BASE 

A. Set preformed cove to receive base. Install base material with adhesive 
and terminate exposed edge with cap strip. Integral base shall be 100 
mm (4 inches high.) 

B. Internal and external corners shall be formed to geometric shape 
generated by cove at either square or radius corners. 

3.5 WELDING 

A. Heat weld all joints of flooring and base using equipment and procedures 
recommended by flooring manufacturer. 

B. Welding shall consist of routing joint, inserting a welding rod into 
routed space, and terminally fusing into a homogeneous joint. 

C. Upon completion of welding, surface across joint shall finish flush, 
free from voids, and recessed or raised areas. 

D. Fusion of Material: Joint shall be fused a minimum of 65 percent through 
thickness of material, and after welding shall meet specified 
characteristics for flooring. 

3.6 CLEANING 

A. Clean small adhesive marks during application of sheet flooring and base 
before adhesive sets, excessive adhesive smearing will not be accepted. 

B. Remove visible adhesive and other surface blemishes using methods and 
cleaner recommended by floor covering manufacturers. 

C. Clean and polish materials per flooring manufacturer’s written 
recommendations. 

D. Vacuum floor thoroughly. 

E. Do not wash floor until after period recommended by floor covering 
manufacturer and then prepare in accordance with manufacturer’s 
recommendations. 


F. Upon completion, Resident Engineer shall inspect floor and base to 
ascertain that work was done in accordance with manufacturer's printed 
instructions. 

G. Perform initial maintenance according to flooring manufacturer’s written 
recommendations. 

3.7 PROTECTION: 

A. Protect installed flooring as recommended by flooring manufacturer 
against damage from rolling loads, other trades, or placement of 
fixtures and furnishings. 

B. Keep traffic off sheet flooring for 24 hours after installation. 

C. Where construction traffic is anticipated, cover sheet flooring with 
reinforced kraft paper properly secured and maintained until removal is 
authorized by the Resident Engineer. 

D. Where protective materials are removed and immediately prior to 
acceptance, repair any damage, re-clean sheet flooring, lightly re-apply 
polish and buff floor. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 09 65 19 
RESILIENT TILE FLOORING 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies the installation of solid vinyl tile flooring, 
vinyl composition tile flooring and accessories. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Color and pattern and location in room finish schedule: Section 09 06 
00, SCHEDULE FOR FINISHES. 

B. Resilient Base: Section 09 65 13, RESILIENT BASE AND ACCESSORIES. 

C. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Description of each product. 

2. Resilient material manufacturers recommendations for adhesives, 
underlayment, primers and polish. 

3. Application and installation instructions. 

C. Samples: 

1. Tile: 300 mm by 300 mm (12 inches by 12 inches) for each type, 
pattern and color. 

2. Edge Strips: 150 mm (6 inches) long, each type. 

3. Feature Strips: 150 mm (6 inches) long. 

D. Shop Drawings: 

1. Layout of patterns shown on the drawings and in Section 09 06 00, 
SCHEDULE FOR FINISHES. 

2. Edge strip locations showing types and detail cross sections. 

E. Test Reports: 

1. Abrasion resistance: Depth of wear for each tile type and color and 
volume loss of tile, certified by independent laboratory. 

2. Tested per ASTM F510. 

1.4 DELIVERY 

A. Deliver materials to the site in original sealed packages or containers, 
clearly marked with the manufacturer's name or brand, type and color, 
production run number and date of manufacture. 

B. Materials from containers which have been distorted, damaged or opened 
prior to installation will be rejected. 

1.5 STORAGE 

A. Store materials in weathertight and dry storage facility. 


B. Protect from damage from handling, water, and temperature. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

D4078-02 (2008).........Water Emulsion Floor Finish 

E648-10.................Critical Radiant Flux of Floor Covering Systems 
Using a Radiant Energy Source 

E662-09.................Specific Optical Density of Smoke Generated by 
Solid Materials 

E1155-96 (R2008)........Determining Floor Flatness and Floor Levelness 
Numbers 

F510-93 (R 2008)........Resistance to Abrasion of Resilient Floor 
Coverings Using an Abrader with a Grit Feed 
Method 

F710-08.................Preparing Concrete Floors to Receive Resilient 
Flooring 

F1066-04 (R2010)........Vinyl Composition Floor Tile 

F1344-10................Rubber Floor Tile 

F1700-04 (R2010)........Solid Vinyl Floor Tile 

C. Resilient Floor Covering Institute (RFCI): 

IP #2...................Installation Practice for Vinyl Composition Tile 
(VCT) 

D. Federal Specifications (Fed. Spec.): 


SS-T-312................Tile Floor: Asphalt, Rubber, Vinyl and Vinyl 
Composition 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 GENERAL 

A. Furnish product type, materials of the same production run and meeting 
following criteria. 

B. Use adhesives, underlayment, primers and polish recommended by the floor 
resilient material manufacturer. 

C. Critical Radiant Flux: 0.45 watts per sq. cm or more, Class I, per ASTM 
E 648. 

D. Smoke density: Less than 450 per ASTM E662. 

2.2 VINYL COMPOSITION TILE 

A. ASTM F1066, Composition 1, Class 2 (through pattern), 300 mm (12 inches) 
square, 3 mm (1/8 inch) thick. 

B. Color and pattern uniformly distributed throughout thickness. 


2.3 SOLID VINYL-TILE 

A. ASTM F1700, 300 mm (12 by 12 inches) square, 3 mm (1/8 inch) thick, 
homogenous throughout. 

B. Color and Pattern uniformly distributed throughout thickness. 

C. Where solid vinyl tiles are specified, seek products with recycled 
content. 

2.5 ADHESIVES 

A. Comply with applicable regulations regarding toxic and hazardous 
materials Green Seal (GS-36) for commercial adhesive. 

B. Use low-VOC adhesive during installation. Water based is preferred over 
solvent based adhesives. 

2.6 PRIMER (FOR CONCRETE SUBFLOORS) 

 As recommended by the adhesive and tile manufacturer. 

2.7 LEVELING COMPOUND (FOR CONCRETE FLOORS) 

A. Provide cementitious products with latex or polyvinyl acetate resins in 
the mix. 

B. Determine the type of underlayment selected for use by the condition to 
be corrected. 

2.8 POLISH AND CLEANERS 

A. Cleaners RFCI CL-1. 

B. Polish: ASTM D4078. 

2.9 EDGE STRIPS 

A. 28 mm (1-1/8 inch) wide unless shown otherwise. 

B. Bevel from maximum thickness to minimum thickness for flush joint unless 
shown otherwise. 

C. Extruded aluminum, mill finish, mechanically cleaned: 

1. Drill and counter sink edge strip for flat head screws. 

2. Space holes near ends and approximately 225 mm (9 inches) on center 
between. 

D. Resilient Edge Strip or Reducer Strip: Fed. Specs. SS-T-312, Solid 
vinyl. 

2.10 SCREWS 

 Stainless steel flat head screw. 

 

2.11 FEATURE STRIPS 

A. Use same material as floor tile. 

B. Sizes and shapes as shown. 


PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 PROJECT CONDITIONS 

A. Maintain temperature of materials a minimum of 22 .C (70 .F,) for 48 
hours before installation. 

B. Maintain temperature of rooms where work occurs between 21 .C and 27 .C 
(70 .F and 80 .F), for at least 48 hours, before, during and after 
installation. 

C. Do not install flooring until building is permanently enclosed and wet 
construction in or near areas to receive tile materials is complete, dry 
and cured. 

3.2 SUBFLOOR PREPARATION 

A. Verify that concrete slabs comply with ASTM F710. At existing slabs, 
determine levelness by F-number method in accordance with ASTM E1155. 
Overall value shall not exceed as follows: 

 FF30/FL20 

B. Correct conditions which will impair proper installation. 

C. Fill cracks, joints and other irregularities in concrete with leveling 
compound: 

1. Do not use adhesive for filling or leveling purposes. 

2. Do not use leveling compound to correct imperfections which can be 
corrected by spot grinding. 

3. Trowel to smooth surface free of trowel marks, pits, dents, 
protrusions, cracks or joints. 

D. Clean floor of oil, paint, dust, and deleterious substances: Leave floor 
dry and cured free of residue from existing curing or cleaning agents. 

E. Concrete Subfloor Testing: 

 Determine Adhesion and dryness of the floor by bond and moisture tests 
as recommended by RFCI manual MRP. 

F. Perform additional subfloor preparation to obtain satisfactory adherence 
of flooring if subfloor test patches allows easy removal of tile. 

G. Prime the concrete subfloor if the primer will seal slab conditions that 
would inhibit bonding, or if priming is recommended by the tile or 
adhesive manufacturers. 

H. Preparation of existing installation shall include the removal of 
existing resilient floor and existing adhesive. Do not use solvents to 
remove adhesives. 

3.3 INSTALLATION 

A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions for application 
and installation unless specified otherwise. 


B. Mix tile from at least two containers. An apparent line either of shades 
or pattern variance will not be accepted. 

C. Tile Layout: 

1. If layout is not shown on drawings, lay tile symmetrically about 
center of room or space with joints aligned. 

2. No tile shall be less than 150 mm (6 inches) and of equal width at 
walls. Vinyl Planks to be no less than half manufactured width and of 
equal width at walls. 

3. Place tile pattern in the same direction; do not alternate tiles. See 
drawings for vinyl plank installation direction. 

D. Trim tiles to touch for the length of intersections at pipes and 
vertical projections, seal joints at pipes with waterproof cement. 

E. Application: 

1. Apply adhesive uniformly with no bare spots. 

a. Conform to RFC1-TM-6 for joint tightness and for corner 
intersection unless layout pattern shows random corner 
intersection. 

b. More than 5 percent of the joints not touching will not be 
accepted. 

2. Roll tile floor with a minimum 45 kg (100 pound) roller. No 
exceptions. 

3. The Resident Engineer may have test tiles removed to check for nonuniform 
adhesion, spotty adhesive coverage, and ease of removal. 
Install new tile for broken removed tile. 

F. Installation of Edge Strips: 

1. Locate edge strips under center line of doors unless otherwise shown. 

2. Set resilient edge strips in adhesive. Anchor metal edge strips with 
anchors and screws specified. 

3. Where tile edge is exposed, butt edge strip to touch along tile edge. 

4. Where thin set ceramic tile abuts resilient tile, set edge strip 
against floor file and against the ceramic tile edge. 

3.4 CLEANING AND PROTECTION 

A. Clean adhesive marks on exposed surfaces during the application of 
resilient materials before the adhesive sets. Exposed adhesive is not 
acceptable. 

B. Keep traffic off resilient material for a minimum 72 hours after 
installation. 

C. Clean and polish materials in the following order: 

1. For the first two weeks sweep and damp mopped only. 


2. After two weeks, scrub resilient materials with a minimum amount of 
water and a mild detergent. Leave surface clean and free of detergent 
residue. 

3. Apply polish to the floors in accordance with the polish 
manufacturer's instructions. 

D. When construction traffic occurs over tile, cover resilient materials 
with reinforced kraft paper properly secured and maintained until 
removal is directed by Resident Engineer. At entrances and where wheeled 
vehicles or carts are used, cover tile with plywood, hardboard, or 
particle board over paper, secured and maintained until removal is 
directed by Resident Engineer. 

E. When protective materials are removed and immediately prior to 
acceptance, replace any damage tile, re-clean resilient materials, 
lightly re-apply polish and buff floors. 

3.6 LOCATION 

A. Unless otherwise specified or shown, install tile flooring, on floor 
under areas where casework, laboratory and pharmacy furniture and other 
equipment occurs, except where mounted in wall recesses. 

B. Extend tile flooring for room into adjacent closets and alcoves. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 09 66 23 

 EPOXY TERRAZZO FLOORING 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

 

1.01 RELATED DOCUMENTS 

 

A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including general 
and supplementary conditions and Division 1 specification sections, 
apply to this section. 

 

1.02 SUMMARY 

 

A. Section Includes: 

1. Thin-set epoxy terrazzo flooring and base including preparation 
of substrates. 

2. Thin-set precast epoxy terrazzo units. 

3. Using Terroxy Resin System as a basis of Design 

 

B. Related Sections: 

1. Section 03 30 00, Cast In Place Concrete. 

2. Section 04 20 00, Unit Masonry. 

3. Section 05 51 00, Metal Stairs. 

4. Section 07 26 16, Below-Grade Vapor Retarder/Barrier. 

5. Section 07 92 00, Joint Sealants. 

6. Section 09 90 00, Painting and Coating. 

11.Section 01 81 11 , For Confirmation of LEED Requirements. 

 

1.03 PRE-INSTALLATION MEETINGS 

 

A. Pre-Installation Conference: Conduct conference at project site to 
comply with requirements in Section 01 31 19 B Project Meetings. 
Review methods and procedures related to terrazzo including, but not 
limited to, the following: 

1. Inspect and discuss installation procedures, joint details, job 
site conditions, substrate specification, vapor barrier details 
and coordination with other trades. 

2. Review and finalize construction schedule and verify availability 
of materials, installer’s personnel, equipment and facilities 
needed to make progress and avoid delays. 

3. Review special terrazzo designs and patterns. 

4. Review dust control procedures. 

5. Review plans for concrete curing and site drying to enable timely 
achievement of suitable slab moisture conditions. 

 

1.04 ACTION SUBMITTALS 

 

A. Manufacturer’s product data for each type of terrazzo and accessory. 
System will be evaluated on the basis of standards. For tests not 
listed in published data, manufacturer shall supply missing data 
according to referenced standard. 

1. Physical properties. 

2. Performance properties. 

3. Specified tests. 


4. Material Safety Data Sheet. 

5. Manufacturer’s standard warranty. 

 

 

B. LEED Submittals 

1. Product Data for Credit MR 4: Submit documentation indicating 
percentages by weight of post-consumer and pre-consumer recycled 
content. 

a. Include statement indicating cost for each product having 
recycled content. 

2. Product Data for Credit MR 5.1: For products manufactured within 
a 500 mile (804.7 km) radius of the project. 

3. Product Data for Credit IEQ 4.1: For adhesives, documentation 
including printed statement of VOC content. 

4. Product Data for Credit IEQ 4.3: For sealers, documentation 
including printed statement of VOC content. 

5. Laboratory Test Reports for Credit IEQ 4: For [adhesives] [and] 
[flooring system], documentation indicating that products comply 
with the testing and product requirements of the California 
Department of Health Services' "Standard Practice for the Testing 
of Volatile Organic Emissions from Various Sources Using 
SmallScale Environmental Chambers." 

 

C. Shop Drawings. Include terrazzo installation requirements. Include 
plans, elevations, sections, component details and attachments to 
other work. Show layout of the following: 

1. Divider strips. 

2. Control and expansion joint strips. 

3. Base and border strips. 

4. Abrasive strips. 

5. Stair treads, risers and landings. 

6. Pre-cast terrazzo jointing and edge configurations including 
anchorage details. 

7. Terrazzo patterns. 

 

D. Samples for initial selection from Terrazzo & Marble Supply color 
plates showing the full range of colors and patterns available for 
each terrazzo type indicated. 

 

E. Samples for Verification: Match architect’s samples for each type, 
material, color and pattern of terrazzo and accessory required 
showing the full range of color, texture and pattern variations 
expected. Label each terrazzo sample to identify Terroxy® Resin 
System’s matrix color and aggregate types, sizes and proportions. 
Prepare samples of same thickness and from same material to be used 
for the work in size indicated below: 

1. Epoxy terrazzo: Minimum 6” x 6” (152.4 mm x 152.4 mm) sample of 
each color and type of terrazzo. 

2. Precast epoxy terrazzo: Minimum 6” x 6” (152.4 mm x 152.4mm) 
sample of each color and type of terrazzo. 

3. Accessories: 6” length (152.4 mm) of each kind of divider strip, 
stop strip and control joint strip required. 

 


1.05 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS 

 

A. Manufacturer Experience: 

1. Submit proof of Associate membership in NTMA. 

2. Submit a list of at least five (5) epoxy terrazzo projects using 
material being submitted for this project installed during the 
last five (5) years of the same scope, complexity and at least 50 
percent of the square footage. 

3. Manufacturer shall provide history of providing primary materials 
for a minimum of ten (10) years. 

 

B. Qualification Data: For qualified installer. 

1. Submit proof of Contractor membership in NTMA. 

2. Furnish a list of at least five (5) epoxy terrazzo projects using 
material being submitted for this project installed during the 
last five (5) years of the same scope, complexity and at least 50 
percent of the square footage. 

 

C. Material Test Reports: For moisture and/or relative humidity of 
substrate. 

 

1.06 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS 

 

A. Maintenance Data: Submit two copies of NTMA maintenance 
recommendations and two copies of manufacturer’s product data. 

 

1.07 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

 

A. Manufacturer Qualifications: 

1. Manufacturer shall be an associate member of NTMA. 

2. Engage an epoxy manufacturer with at least ten (10) years 
experience in the manufacture of epoxy flooring materials. 

 

B. Installer Qualifications: 

1. Installer shall be a contractor member of NTMA. 

2. Installer shall be certified in writing by terrazzo manufacturer 
as qualified to install manufacturer's products. 

3. Installer shall have at least five (5) years of satisfactory 
experience in installation of epoxy terrazzo. Installer shall 
demonstrate experience during last five (5) years by having 
completed at least five (5) projects of comparable scope and 
complexity of at least 50 percent of the total square footage of 
this project. 

 

C. Source Limitations: 

1. Obtain primary Epoxy Terrazzo Flooring System materials including 
moisture treatment, membranes, primers, resins and hardening 
agents from a single manufacturer with proof of NTMA Associate 
membership. 

2. Obtain secondary materials, including patching and fill material, 
joint sealant, and repair materials, of type and from source 
recommended by manufacturer of primary materials. 

3. Obtain each color, grade, type, and variety of granular material 
from single source with resources to provide materials of 
consistent quality in appearance and physical properties. 

 


D. NTMA Standards: Comply with NTMA’s “Terrazzo Specifications and 
Design Guide” and with written recommendations for terrazzo type 
indicated unless more stringent requirements are specified. 

 

E. Mock-Ups: Build mock-ups to verify selections made under sample 
submittals and to demonstrate aesthetic effects and set quality 
standards for materials and execution. 

 1. Build mock-ups for terrazzo including accessories. 

a. Size: Minimum 100 sq. ft. (9.3 sq. m) of typical poured-inplace 
flooring and base condition for each color and pattern 
as indicated on Floor Finish Plans in locations directed by VA 
representative at the JLM Memorial Veterans Hospital. 

2. Approved mockups may become part of the completed work if 
undisturbed at time of Substantial Completion. 

 

1.08 DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 

 

A. Deliver materials to project site in supplier’s original wrappings 
and containers labeled with source’s or manufacturer’s name, 
material or product brand name and lot number if any. 

 

B. Store materials in their original, undamaged packages and containers 
inside a well-ventilated area protected from weather, moisture, 
soiling, extreme temperatures and humidity. 

1. Storage temperatures should be between 50°F to 80°F. 

 

1.09 FIELD CONDITIONS 

 

A. Environmental Limitations: Comply with manufacturer's written 
instructions for substrate temperature, ambient temperature, 
moisture, ventilation, and other conditions affecting terrazzo 
installation. 

1. Maintain the ambient room and floor temperature at 50°F or above 
for a period extending 72 hours before, during and after floor 
installation. 

2. Prior to and during each day of installation, verify that the dew 
point is at least 5°F less than the slab and air temperature. 

 

B. Field Measurements: Verify actual dimensions of construction 
contiguous with precast terrazzo by field measurements before 
fabrication. 

 

C. Provide permanent lighting or, if permanent lighting is not in 
place, simulate permanent lighting conditions during terrazzo 
installation. 

 

D. Close spaces to traffic during terrazzo application and for not less 
than 24 hours after application unless manufacturer recommends a 
longer period. 

 

E. Control and collect water and dust produced by grinding operations. 
Protect adjacent construction from detrimental effects of grinding 
operations. 

 

F. Provide protection from other trades prior to date of Substantial 
Completion. 

 

 


 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

 

2.01 MANUFACTURERS: 

 

A. Acceptable manufacturers; subject to compliance with specified 
requirements: 

1. Basis of design: Terrazzo & Marble Supply Companies, Terroxy® 
Systems Epoxy Matrix. (www.tmsupply.com). 

2. Quadrant Chemical Companies. 

3. TEC Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., Tuff-Lite Epoxy Terrazzo 
Systems. 

 

2.02 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS: 

 

A. FloorScore Compliance: Terrazzo floors shall comply with 
requirements of FloorScore Standard. 

 

B. LowEmitting Materials: Flooring system shall comply with the 
testing and product requirements of the California Department of 
Health Services' "Standard Practice for the Testing of Volatile 
Organic Emissions from Various Sources Using SmallScale 
Environmental Chambers." 

 

2.03 MATERIALS: 

 

A. Primer for Slabs above Grade: Terroxy® Primer. 

 

B. Moisture Vapor Treatment for Slabs-On-Grade, Light Weight Concrete 
and Green Concrete: Terroxy® Moisture Vapor Treatment. 

1. Physical properties of moisture mitigating primer shall have a 
maximum of 0.3 perms with 100% RH. Moisture Vapor Treatment must 
suppress a minimum of 91% Relative Humidity. 

 

C. Flexible Reinforcing Membrane for Substrate Crack Preparation and 
Reflective Crack Reduction: Terroxy® Iso-Crack Epoxy Membrane. 

1. Reinforcement (Optional): Terroxy® fiberglass scrim. 

 

D. Epoxy Matrix: Terroxy® Epoxy Matrix in color required for mix 
indicated. 

1. Physical properties without aggregates. All specimens cured for 
7 days at 75°F plus or minus 2°F and 50 percent plus or minus 2 
percent RH. This product shall meet the following requirements: 

 

Property 

Test Method 

Terrazzo Typical Results 

Hardness 

ASTM D-2240 using Shore- 
D Durometer 

75-85 

Tensile Strength 

ASTM D-638 

3,000 psi min. to 5000 psi 
max. 

Compressive 
Strength 

ASTM D-695 Specimen B 
cylinder 

12,000 psi min. (82.7 MPa) 

Flexural Strength 

ASTM D-790 

4,500 psi min. (31.7 MPa) 




 

 

 

 



 

Chemical 
Resistance 

ASTM D-1308 seven days 
at room temperature by 
immersion method 

No deleterious effects: 

• Distilled Water 

• Mineral Oil 

• Isopropanol 

• Ethanol 

• 0.025 Detergent Solution 

• 1% Soap Solution 

• 10% Sodium Hydroxide 

• 10% Hydrochloric Acid 

• 30% Sulfuric Acid 

• 5% Acetic Acid 



 

 

2. Physical properties with aggregates. For Epoxy Matrix blended 
with three volumes of Valders marble blended 60% #1 chip and 40% 
#0 chip, ground and grouted with epoxy resin according to 
Installation Specifications, finishing to a nominal 3/8” (9.5 mm) 
thickness. All specimens cured for 7 days at 73-77°F and 50 
percent RH plus or minus 2 percent RH. This finished Epoxy 
Matrix shall meet the following requirements: 

 

Property 

Test Method 

Thin-set Epoxy Terrazzo Typical 
Results 

Flammability 

ASTM D-635 

Self extinguishing, extent of 
burning 0.25 inches (6.4 mm) max 

Thermal 
Coefficient of 
Linear Expansion 

ASTM D-696 

25x10-6 inches per inch per 
degrees to 140ºF 

11.4 x 10-7 cm per cm per 1C to 
601C Max 

Bond Strength 

ACI COMM 403, 
Bulletin 59-43 

(pages 1139- 
1141) 

300 psi (100% concrete failure) 

2.1 MPa (100% concrete failure) 



 

 

E. Aggregates [OPTION: Marble, Glass, Mother of Pearl, Porcelain, 
Concrete] complying with NTMA gradation standards for mix indicated 
and containing no deleterious or foreign matter. 

1. Abrasion and Impact Resistance: Less than 40 percent loss per 
ASTM C 131. 

2. 24-Hour Absorption Rate: Less than 0.74 percent. 

3. Dust Content: Less than 1.0 percent by weight. 

 

4. Post-consumer recycled content plus one-half of pre-consumer 
recycled content 

 not less than 10 percent. 

 


F. Finishing Grout: Terroxy® Epoxy Matrix or Terroxy® Clear Resin with a 
broadcast of limestone filler as recommended by Terroxy® Resin 
Systems product data. 

 

2.04 STRIP MATERIALS 

 

A. Thin-set Divider Strips: L-type. 

1. Material White-zinc alloy selected from Domus Terrazzo full 
range. 

2. Guide for commonly used L-type divider strips for Thin-set Epoxy 
Terrazzo Systems: 

 

System Height 

Strip Height 

Strip Width 

3/8” System 

3/8” 

16 gauge 

1/8” 

1/4” 



 

2.05 MISCELLANEOUS ACCESSORIES 

 

A. Strip Adhesive: 100% solids epoxy resin adhesive recommended by 
Terroxy® Resin Systems. 

 

1. Adhesives shall have a VOC content of 70 g/L or less when 
calculated according to 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24). 
Adhesives shall comply with the testing and product requirements 
of the California Department of Health Services' "Standard 
Practice for the Testing of Volatile Organic Emissions from 
Various Sources Using SmallScale Environmental Chambers." 

 

B. Anchoring Devices: 

1. Strips: Provide mechanical anchoring devices for strip 
materials as required for secure attachment to substrate. 

2. Precast Terrazzo: Provide mechanical anchoring devices as 
recommended by terrazzo contractor for proper anchorage and 
support of units for conditions of installation and support. 

 

C. Patching and Fill Material: Terroxy® Fill and selected aggregates 
as recommended by Terroxy® Resin Systems. 

 

D. Joint Compound: Terroxy® Joint Filler, color to be selected by 
architect to match/compliment terrazzo. 

 

E. Cleaner: Terroxy® Terra Clean, a neutral cleaner with pH factor 
between 7 and 10 specifically designed for terrazzo. 

 

G. Sealer: Slip and stain-resistant sealer that is chemically 
neutral with a pH factor between 7 and 10, that meets a standard 
coefficient of friction of 0.5 or higher, as measured by the James 
Machine (ASTM D-2047 Test Method), does not affect physical 
properties of terrazzo and complies with NTMA’s “Terrazzo 
Specifications and Design Guide.” 

1. Sealers shall have a VOC content of 200 g/L or less when 
calculated according to 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24). 

2. [Option 1: Terroxy® WB Acrylic Sealer, medium gloss, waterbased 
sealer.] 

4. [Option 3] TRX Water Based 2-K Urethane / Acrylic Coating 


 

 

5. Sealers shall have a VOC content of 200 g/L or less when 
calculated according to 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24). 

 

 

C. Terrazzo Cove Base: 

1. Terroxy® Resin Systems Epoxy Matrix poured-in-place cover base 
with 3/4” (19mm) radius, 4” high. (4” (101.2 mm), 

 

2.07 TERRAZZO MIX: 

A. Mix: Comply with NTMA’s “Terrazzo Specifications and Design Guide” 
and manufacturer’s product data for matrix and aggregate proportions 
and mixing. 

1. Color and pattern schedule: Where the following designations are 
indicated, provide specified terrazzo matrices matching 
architects samples: 

a. TER-01: EP1-51 

b. TER-02: EP11-68 

c. TER-03: EP11-66 

d. TER-04: TM#14-3304 Red 

e. TER-05: TM#14-3305 Blue 

f. TER-06: TM#14-3306 Yellow 

g. TER-07: TM#14-3303 Green 

 

 

A. Mix: Comply with NTMA’s “Terrazzo Specifications and Design Guide” 
and manufacturer’s product data for matrix and aggregate proportions 
and mixing. 

1. Color and Pattern Schedule: Where the following designations are 
indicated, provide specified terrazzo matrices matching 
Architect’s samples: 

c. Sample shall be approved by VA representative and Architect. 

d. Adjustments of proportions to individual colors may be 
necessary to obtain the intended appearance. No additional 
cost shall be charged to Owner if overall proportions for 
entire project remain within he proportions specified above. 

 

 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

 

3.01 EXAMINATION 

 

A. Examine substrates and areas for compliance with requirements for 
installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance. 

 

B. Acceptable Substrates: 

1. Level Tolerance: Concrete sub-floor shall be level with a maximum 
variation from level of 1/4” in any 10 feet (6.4 mm in 3.1m). 
Irregularities of the surface requiring patching and/or leveling 
shall be done using Terroxy® Fill and selected aggregates as 
recommended by Terroxy® Resin Systems. 

2. Concrete floor shall have a steel trowel finish. 

3. Concrete shall have been cured a minimum of 28 days. No curing 
agents shall have been used in areas to receive terrazzo. 

4. Concrete slab shall have an efficient moisture vapor barrier 
(minimum 15 mils (.4 mm thickness)) directly under the concrete 
slab. Moisture barrier shall not be punctured. 


5. Saw cutting of control joints shall have been done between 12 and 
24 hours after placement of the structural concrete and at a 
frequency compatible with ACI recommendations. 

 

C. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions, 
including level tolerances, have been corrected. 

 

3.02 PREPARATION 

 

A. Clean substrates of substances, including oil, grease and curing 
compounds, that might impair terrazzo bond. Provide clean, dry and 
neutral substrate for terrazzo application. 

 

B. Concrete Slabs: 

1. Provide sound concrete surface free of laitance, glaze, 
efflorescence, curing compounds, form- release agents, dust, 
dirt, grease, oil and other contaminants incompatible with 
terrazzo. 

a. Prepare concrete mechanically by shot blasting. Surface 
preparation results should achieve a CSP3-CSP5 profile 
according to International Concrete Repair Institute Guideline 
No. 03732. 

b. The General Contractor shall be responsible for correcting 
non-conforming concrete substrates using materials compatible 
with epoxy terrazzo flooring system and as approved by the 
Terrazzo Contractor. 

 1. Materials used to correct nonconforming conditions must 
be compatible with the selected epoxy system and be 
approved by the manufacturer of epoxy resin materials 
and Terrazzo Contractor. 

c. Repair cracks and non-expansion joints greater than 1/16” 
(1.6 mm) wide according to Terroxy® Resin Systems Technical 
Bulletin 009 Crack Detailing and Joint Treatments for Terroxy® 
Resin Thin-set epoxy terrazzo. 

d. Protect other work from dust generated by shot blasting 
operations. Control dust to prevent air pollution and comply 
with environmental protection regulations. 

e. Erect and maintain temporary enclosures and other suitable 
methods to prevent dust migration and to ensure adequate 
ambient temperatures and ventilation conditions during 
installation. 

C. Verify that concrete substrates are visibly dry and free of 
moisture. Document the moisture level of concrete slab-on-grade 
surfaces prior to installation of terrazzo. Test moisture level 
with accord with ASTM F2170 (determining relative humidity in 
concrete slabs using in situ probes). 

 

D. Primer application: 

1. At Slabs-On-Grade, Light Weight Concrete and Green Concrete: 
Apply moisture vapor treatment in accord with Moisture Vapor 
Treatment Product Data Sheet. 

2. At Slabs Above Grade: Apply primer in accord with manufacturer’s 
product data. 

 

 

 

 

 


3.03 EPOXY TERRAZZO INSTALLATION 

 

A. General: 

1. Comply with NTMA’s written recommendations for terrazzo and 
accessory installation. 

2. Place, rough grind, grout, cure grout, fine grind and finish 
terrazzo according to Terroxy Resin Systems Epoxy Matrix Product 
Data Sheet and NTMA’s “Terrazzo Specifications and Design Guide.” 

3. Ensure that matrix components and fluids from grinding 
operations do not stain terrazzo by reacting with divider and 
control-joint strips. 

4. Delay fine grinding until heavy trade work is complete and 
construction traffic through area is restricted. 

 

B. Thickness: 3/8” (9.5 mm) 

 

C. Flexible Reinforcing Membrane: 

1. Membrane Application for Isolated Cracking: Route out all cracks 
and fill with 100% solids epoxy. Apply Flexible Reinforcing 
Membrane (spread at 40 mils thickness) across the crack allowing 
a minimum of 12 inches on either side. Embed fiberglass scrim on 
top wet membrane. Allow for 10% of total terrazzo square footage 
in lineal feet of crack detailing. Ex) 10,000 SF allow for 1,000 
LF of crack detailing. 1LF of crack detailing shall allow for 2 
SF of Iso-Crack Epoxy Membrane, 1 SF on each side of the crack or 
control joint. 

 

D. Divider and Accessory Strip installation: 

1. Install strips in adhesive setting bed without voids below strips 
or mechanically anchor strips as required to attach strips to 
substrate. 

2. Control-Joint Strips: Separate double L-type angles, positioned 
back to back with minimum 1/8"-1/4" width between. 

3. Construction-Joint (Cold-Joint) Strips: Separate double L-type 
angles, positioned back to back with minimum 1/8"-1/4" width 
between. Fill joint and area between strips with elastomeric 
joint filler. 

4. Match material, thickness and color of divider strips and depth 
required for topping thickness indicated. 

5. Isolation-Joint Strips: Separate double L-type angles, positioned 
back to back with minimum 1/8"-1/4" width between. Fill area 
between strips with elastomeric joint filler. Match material, 
thickness and color of divider strips and depth required for 
topping thickness indicated. 

 

F. At terminations and doorways, saw cut concrete and chisel out to 
provide proper termination of flooring material; no featheredges 
allowed. 

 

G. Placing Terrazzo: 

1. Mix epoxy matrix with chips and fillers in ratios directed by 
Terroxy® Resin Systems product data. 

 

2. Trowel apply terrazzo mixture over epoxy primer to provide a 
dense flat surface to top of divider strips. Allow to cure in 
accord with Terroxy® Resin Systems product data before rough 
grinding. 

 


3. Extend flooring material up wall surface to form integral coved 
base. Bond directly to wall surfaces. Bases in wet areas shall 
be free of seams which could allow water to enter substrate. 

 

G. Rough Grinding: Grind with 24 grit silicon carbide or 24 grit 
turbo diamonds until all terrazzo strips and marble chips are 
uniformly exposed. 

 

H. Grouting: 

1. Cleanse floor with clean water and rinse. 

2. Remove excess rinse water by wet vacuum, dry and fill voids 
with Terroxy® Resin Systems Epoxy Matrix or Clear Resin with a 
broadcast of limestone filler. 

3. Allow grout to cure. Grout may be left on terrazzo until other 
trades work is completed. 

 

I. Polishing: Polish with 120 grit T&M Resin Pads or equivalent 
stones until all grout is removed from surface. Repeat rough 
grinding, grout coat and polishing if large terrazzo chip voids 
exist after initial polishing. Produce surface with a minimum of 70 
percent aggregate exposure. 

 

J. Completed flooring shall be uniform in color, texture and aggregate 
distribution. Surface shall be in place and uniform and free of 
bubbles, foreign material, defect or irregularity. Trim edges and 
where material abuts adjacent construction. Edges at doors shall 
occur under closed door. 

 

3.04 PRECAST TERRAZZO INSTALLATION 

 

A. Install precast units using method recommended by NTMA and 
manufacturer unless otherwise indicated. 

B. Seal joints between units with joint sealants. 

 

3.05 CLEANING AND PROTECTION 

 

A. Cleaning: Remove grinding dust from installation and wash all 
surfaces with Terroxy® Terra Clean. 

 

B. Sealing: Apply slip and stain-resistant sealer that is chemically 
neutral with a pH factor between 7 and 10,that meets a standard 
coefficient of friction of 0.5 or higher, as measured by the James 
Machine (ASTM D-2047 Test Method), does not affect physical 
properties of terrazzo and complies with NTMA’s “Terrazzo 
Specifications and Design Guide.” 

 

C. Protection: Upon completion, the work shall be ready for final 
inspection and acceptance by the owner or his agent. Provide final 
protection and maintain conditions, in a manner acceptable to 
terrazzo contractor, that ensure terrazzo is without damage or 
deterioration. 

 

 

END OF SECTION 

 

 


SECTION 09 91 00 
PAINTING 

 

PART 1-GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Section specifies field painting. 

B. Section specifies prime coats which may be applied in shop under other 
sections. 

C. Painting includes shellacs, stains, varnishes, coatings specified, and 
striping or markers and identity markings. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Shop prime painting of steel and ferrous metals: Division 05 - METALS, 
Division 08 - OPENINGS, Division 10 - SPECIALTIES, Division 11 - 
EQUIPMENT, Division 12 - FURNISHINGS, Division 13 – SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION, 
Division 14 – CONVEYING EQUIPMENT, Division 21 – FIRE SUPPRESSION, 
Division 22 - PLUMBING, Division 23 – HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIRCONDITIONING, 
Division 26 - ELECTRICAL, Division 27 - COMMUNICATIONS, and 
Division 28 – ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND SECURITY sections. 

B. Contractor option: Prefinished flush doors with transparent finishes: 
Section 08 14 00, WOOD DOORS. 

C. Type of Finish, Color, and Gloss Level of Finish Coat: as noted or TBA 
from manufacturer’s full range. 

D. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

Before work is started, or sample panels are prepared, submit 
manufacturer's literature, the current Master Painters Institute (MPI) 
"Approved Product List" indicating brand label, product name and product 
code as of the date of contract award, will be used to determine 
compliance with the submittal requirements of this specification. The 
Contractor may choose to use subsequent MPI "Approved Product List", 
however, only one list may be used for the entire contract and each 
coating system is to be from a single manufacturer. All coats on a 
particular substrate must be from a single manufacturer. No variation from 
the MPI "Approved Product List" where applicable is acceptable. 

C. Sample Panels: 

1. After painters' materials have been approved and before work is started 
submit sample panels showing each type of finish and color specified. 


2. Panels to show color: Composition board, 100 by 250 by 3 mm (4 inch by 
10 inch by 1/8 inch). 

3. Panel to show transparent finishes: Wood of same species and grain 
pattern as wood approved for use, 100 by 250 by 3 mm (4 inch by 10 inch 
face by 1/4 inch) thick minimum, and where both flat and edge grain 
will be exposed, 250 mm (10 inches) long by sufficient size, 50 by 50 
mm (2 by 2 inch) minimum or actual wood member to show complete finish. 

4. Attach labels to panel stating the following: 

a. Federal Specification Number or manufacturers name and product 
number of paints used. 

b. Product type and color. 

c. Name of project. 

5. Strips showing not less than 50 mm (2 inch) wide strips of undercoats 
and 100 mm (4 inch) wide strip of finish coat. 

D. Sample of identity markers if used. 

E. Manufacturers' Certificates indicating compliance with specified 
requirements: 

1. Manufacturer's paint substituted for Federal Specification paints meets 
or exceeds performance of paint specified. 

2. High temperature aluminum paint. 

3. Epoxy coating. 

4. Intumescent clear coating or fire retardant paint. 

5. Plastic floor coating. 

1.4 DELIVERY AND STORAGE 

A. Deliver materials to site in manufacturer's sealed container marked to 
show following: 

1. Name of manufacturer. 

2. Product type. 

3. Batch number. 

4. Instructions for use. 

5. Safety precautions. 

B. In addition to manufacturer's label, provide a label legibly printed as 
following: 

1. Federal Specification Number, where applicable, and name of material. 

2. Surface upon which material is to be applied. 

3. If paint or other coating, state coat types; prime, body or finish. 

C. Maintain space for storage, and handling of painting materials and 
equipment in a neat and orderly condition to prevent spontaneous 
combustion from occurring or igniting adjacent items. 

D. Store materials at site at least 24 hours before using, at a temperature 
between 18 and 30 degrees C (65 and 85 degrees F). 


1.5 MOCK-UP PANEL 

 

A. Before starting application of water paint mixtures, apply paint as 
specified to an area, not to exceed 9 m2 (100 ft2), selected by Resident 
Engineer. 

B. Finish and texture approved by Resident Engineer will be used as a 
standard of quality for remainder of work. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to the extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by basic designation 
only. 

B. American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH): 

ACGIH TLV-BKLT-2012.....Threshold Limit Values (TLV) for Chemical 
Substances and Physical Agents and Biological 
Exposure Indices (BEIs) 

ACGIH TLV-DOC-2012......Documentation of Threshold Limit Values and 
Biological Exposure Indices, (Seventh Edition) 

C. American National Standards Institute (ANSI): 

A13.1-07................Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems 

D. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

D260-86..........Boiled Linseed Oil 

E. Commercial Item Description (CID): 

A-A-1555................Water Paint, Powder (Cementitious, White and 
Colors) (WPC) (cancelled) 

A-A-3120................Paint, For Swimming Pools (RF) (cancelled) 

F. Federal Specifications (Fed Spec): 

TT-P-1411A..............Paint, Copolymer-Resin, Cementitious (For 
Waterproofing Concrete and Masonry Walls) (CEP) 

G. Master Painters Institute (MPI): 

No. 1-12................Aluminum Paint (AP) 

No. 4-12................Interior/ Exterior Latex Block Filler 

No. 5-12................Exterior Alkyd Wood Primer 

No. 7-12................Exterior Oil Wood Primer 

No. 8-12................Exterior Alkyd, Flat MPI Gloss Level 1 (EO) 

No. 9-12................Exterior Alkyd Enamel MPI Gloss Level 6 (EO) 

No. 10-12...............Exterior Latex, Flat (AE) 

No. 11-12...............Exterior Latex, Semi-Gloss (AE) 

No. 18-12...............Organic Zinc Rich Primer 

No. 22-12...............Aluminum Paint, High Heat (up to 590% - 1100F) 
(HR) 

No. 26-12...............Cementitious Galvanized Metal Primer 


No. 27-12...............Exterior / Interior Alkyd Floor Enamel, Gloss (FE) 

No. 31-12...............Polyurethane, Moisture Cured, Clear Gloss (PV) 

No. 36-12...............Knot Sealer 

No. 43-12...............Interior Satin Latex, MPI Gloss Level 4 

No. 44-12...............Interior Low Sheen Latex, MPI Gloss Level 2 

No. 45-12...............Interior Primer Sealer 

No. 46-12...............Interior Enamel Undercoat 

No. 47-12...............Interior Alkyd, Semi-Gloss, MPI Gloss Level 5 (AK) 

No. 48-12...............Interior Alkyd, Gloss, MPI Gloss Level 6 (AK) 

No. 49-12...............Interior Alkyd, Flat, MPI Gloss Level 1 (AK) 

No. 50-12...............Interior Latex Primer Sealer 

No. 51-12...............Interior Alkyd, Eggshell, MPI Gloss Level 3 

No. 52-12...............Interior Latex, MPI Gloss Level 3 (LE) 

No. 53-12...............Interior Latex, Flat, MPI Gloss Level 1 (LE) 

No. 54-12...............Interior Latex, Semi-Gloss, MPI Gloss Level 5 (LE) 

No. 59-12...............Interior/Exterior Alkyd Porch & Floor Enamel, Low 
Gloss (FE) 

No. 60-12...............Interior/Exterior Latex Porch & Floor Paint, Low 
Gloss 

No. 66-12...............Interior Alkyd Fire Retardant, Clear Top-Coat (ULC 
Approved) (FC) 

No. 67-12...............Interior Latex Fire Retardant, Top-Coat (ULC 
Approved) (FR) 

No. 68-12...............Interior/ Exterior Latex Porch & Floor Paint, 
Gloss 

No. 71-12...............Polyurethane, Moisture Cured, Clear, Flat (PV) 

No. 74-12...............Interior Alkyd Varnish, Semi-Gloss 

No. 77-12...............Epoxy Cold Cured, Gloss (EC) 

No. 79-12...............Marine Alkyd Metal Primer 

No. 90-12...............Interior Wood Stain, Semi-Transparent (WS) 

No. 91-12...............Wood Filler Paste 

No. 94-12...............Exterior Alkyd, Semi-Gloss (EO) 

No. 95-12...............Fast Drying Metal Primer 

No. 98-12...............High Build Epoxy Coating 

No. 101-12..............Epoxy Anti-Corrosive Metal Primer 

No. 108-12..............High Build Epoxy Coating, Low Gloss (EC) 

No. 114-12..............Interior Latex, Gloss (LE) and (LG) 

No. 119-12..............Exterior Latex, High Gloss (acrylic) (AE) 

No. 135-12..............Non-Cementitious Galvanized Primer 

No. 138-12..............Interior High Performance Latex, MPI Gloss Level 2 
(LF) 


No. 139-12..............Interior High Performance Latex, MPI Gloss Level 3 
(LL) 

No. 140-12..............Interior High Performance Latex, MPI Gloss Level 4 

No. 141-12..............Interior High Performance Latex (SG) MPI Gloss 
Level 5 

H. Steel Structures Painting Council (SSPC): 

SSPC SP 1-04 (R2004)....Solvent Cleaning 

SSPC SP 2-04 (R2004)....Hand Tool Cleaning 

SSPC SP 3-04 (R2004)....Power Tool Cleaning 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. Cementitious Paint (CEP): TT-P-1411A [Paint, Copolymer-Resin, Cementitious 
(CEP)], Type 1 for exterior use, Type II for interior use. 

B. Wood Sealer: MPI 31 (gloss) or MPI 71 (flat) thinned with thinner 
recommended by manufacturer at rate of about one part of thinner to four 
parts of varnish. 

C. Plastic Tape: 

1. Pigmented vinyl plastic film in colors as specified. 

2. Pressure sensitive adhesive back. 

3. Widths as shown. 

D. Identity markers options: 

1. Pressure sensitive vinyl markers. 

2. Snap-on coil plastic markers. 

E. Interior/Exterior Latex Block Filler: MPI 4. 

F. Exterior Alkyd Enamel (EO): MPI 9. 

. 

G. Organic Zinc rich Coating (HR): MPI 22. 

H. Knot Sealer: MPI 36. 

I. Interior Satin Latex: MPI 43. 

J. Interior Low Sheen Latex: MPI 44. 

K. Interior Primer Sealer: MPI 45. 

L. Interior Enamel Undercoat: MPI 47. 

M. Interior Alkyd, Semi-Gloss (AK): MPI 47. 

N. Interior Alkyd, Gloss (AK): MPI 49. 

O. Interior Latex Primer Sealer: MPI 50. 

P. Interior Latex, MPI Gloss Level 3 (LE): MPI 52. 

Q. Interior Latex, Semi-Gloss, MPI Gloss Level 5 (LE): MPI 54. 

R. Wood Filler Paste: MPI 91. 

S. Exterior Alkyd, Semi-Gloss (EO): MPI 94. 

T. Fast Drying Metal Primer: MPI 95. 


U. Waterborne Galvanized Primer: MPI 134. 

V. Non-Cementitious Galvanized Primer: MPI 135. 

2.2 PAINT PROPERTIES 

A. Use ready-mixed (including colors), except two component epoxies, 
polyurethanes, polyesters, paints having metallic powders packaged 
separately and paints requiring specified additives. 

B. Where no requirements are given in the referenced specifications for 
primers, use primers with pigment and vehicle, compatible with substrate 
and finish coats specified. 

2.3 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS/QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Paint materials shall conform to the restrictions of the local 
Environmental and Toxic Control jurisdiction. 

1. Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC): VOC content of paint materials shall 
not exceed 10g/l for interior latex paints/primers and 50g/l for 
exterior latex paints and primers. 

2. Lead-Base Paint: 

a. Comply with Section 410 of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention 
Act, as amended, and with implementing regulations promulgated by 
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 

b. Regulations concerning prohibition against use of lead-based paint 
in federal and federally assisted construction, or rehabilitation of 
residential structures are set forth in Subpart F, Title 24, Code of 
Federal Regulations, Department of Housing and Urban Development. 

c. For lead-paint removal, see Section 02 83 33.13, LEAD-BASED PAINT 
REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL. 

3. Asbestos: Materials shall not contain asbestos. 

4. Chromate, Cadmium, Mercury, and Silica: Materials shall not contain 
zinc-chromate, strontium-chromate, Cadmium, mercury or mercury 
compounds or free crystalline silica. 

5. Human Carcinogens: Materials shall not contain any of the ACGIH-BKLT 
and ACGHI-DOC confirmed or suspected human carcinogens. 

6. Use high performance acrylic paints in place of alkyd paints, where 
possible. 

7. VOC content for solvent-based paints shall not exceed 250g/l and shall 
not be formulated with more than one percent aromatic hydro carbons by 
weight. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 JOB CONDITIONS 

A. Safety: Observe required safety regulations and manufacturer's warning and 
instructions for storage, handling and application of painting materials. 


1. Take necessary precautions to protect personnel and property from 
hazards due to falls, injuries, toxic fumes, fire, explosion, or other 
harm. 

2. Deposit soiled cleaning rags and waste materials in metal containers 
approved for that purpose. Dispose of such items off the site at end of 
each days work. 

B. Atmospheric and Surface Conditions: 

1. Do not apply coating when air or substrate conditions are: 

a. Less than 3 degrees C (5 degrees F) above dew point. 

b. Below 10 degrees C (50 degrees F) or over 35 degrees C (95 degrees 
F), unless specifically pre-approved by the Contracting Officer and 
the product manufacturer. Under no circumstances shall application 
conditions exceed manufacturer recommendations. 

2. Maintain interior temperatures until paint dries hard. 

3. Do no exterior painting when it is windy and dusty. 

4. Do not paint in direct sunlight or on surfaces that the sun will soon 
warm. 

5. Apply only on clean, dry and frost free surfaces except as follows: 

a. Apply water thinned acrylic and cementitious paints to damp (not 
wet) surfaces where allowed by manufacturer's printed instructions. 

b. Dampened with a fine mist of water on hot dry days concrete and 
masonry surfaces to which water thinned acrylic and cementitious 
paints are applied to prevent excessive suction and to cool surface. 

6. Varnishing: 

a. Apply in clean areas and in still air. 

b. Before varnishing vacuum and dust area. 

c. Immediately before varnishing wipe down surfaces with a tack rag. 

 

3.2 SURFACE PREPARATION 

A. Method of surface preparation is optional, provided results of finish 
painting produce solid even color and texture specified with no overlays. 

B. General: 

1. Remove prefinished items not to be painted such as lighting fixtures, 
escutcheon plates, hardware, trim, and similar items for reinstallation 
after paint is dried. 

2. Remove items for reinstallation and complete painting of such items and 
adjacent areas when item or adjacent surface is not accessible or 
finish is different. 

3. See other sections of specifications for specified surface conditions 
and prime coat. 


4. Clean surfaces for painting with materials and methods compatible with 
substrate and specified finish. Remove any residue remaining from 
cleaning agents used. Do not use solvents, acid, or steam on concrete 
and masonry. 

C. Wood: 

1. Sand to a smooth even surface and then dust off. 

2. Sand surfaces showing raised grain smooth between each coat. 

3. Wipe surface with a tack rag prior to applying finish. 

4. Surface painted with an opaque finish: 

a. Coat knots, sap and pitch streaks with MPI 36 (Knot Sealer) before 
applying paint. 

b. Apply two coats of MPI 36 (Knot Sealer) over large knots. 

5. After application of prime or first coat of stain, fill cracks, nail 
and screw holes, depressions and similar defects with wood filler 
paste. Sand the surface to make smooth and finish flush with adjacent 
surface. 

6. Before applying finish coat, reapply wood filler paste if required, and 
sand surface to remove surface blemishes. Finish flush with adjacent 
surfaces. 

7. Fill open grained wood such as oak, walnut, ash and mahogany with MPI 
91 (Wood Filler Paste), colored to match wood color. 

a. Thin filler in accordance with manufacturer's instructions for 
application. 

b. Remove excess filler, wipe as clean as possible, dry, and sand as 
specified. 

D. Ferrous Metals: 

1. Remove oil, grease, soil, drawing and cutting compounds, flux and other 
detrimental foreign matter in accordance with SSPC-SP 1 (Solvent 
Cleaning). 

2. Remove loose mill scale, rust, and paint, by hand or power tool 
cleaning, as defined in SSPC-SP 2 (Hand Tool Cleaning) and SSPC-SP 3 
(Power Tool Cleaning). Exception: where high temperature aluminum paint 
is used, prepare surface in accordance with paint manufacturer's 
instructions. 

3. Fill dents, holes and similar voids and depressions in flat exposed 
surfaces of hollow steel doors and frames, access panels, roll-up steel 
doors and similar items specified to have semi-gloss or gloss finish 
with TT-F-322D (Filler, Two-Component Type, For Dents, Small Holes and 
Blow-Holes). Finish flush with adjacent surfaces. 

a. This includes flat head countersunk screws used for permanent 
anchors. 


b. Do not fill screws of item intended for removal such as glazing 
beads. 

4. Spot prime abraded and damaged areas in shop prime coat which expose 
bare metal with same type of paint used for prime coat. Feather edge of 
spot prime to produce smooth finish coat. 

5. Spot prime abraded and damaged areas which expose bare metal of factory 
finished items with paint as recommended by manufacturer of item. 

E. Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) Metal, Aluminum, Surfaces Specified Painted: 

1. Clean surfaces to remove grease, oil and other deterrents to paint 
adhesion in accordance with SSPC-SP 1 (Solvent Cleaning). 

2. Spot coat abraded and damaged areas of zinc-coating which expose base 
metal on hot-dip zinc-coated items with MPI 18 (Organic Zinc Rich 
Coating). Prime or spot prime with MPI 134 (Waterborne Galvanized 
Primer) or MPI 135 (Non- Cementitious Galvanized Primer) depending on 
finish coat compatibility. 

F. Masonry, Concrete, Cement Board, Cement Plaster and Stucco: 

1. Clean and remove dust, dirt, oil, grease efflorescence, form release 
agents, laitance, and other deterrents to paint adhesion. 

2. Use emulsion type cleaning agents to remove oil, grease, paint and 
similar products. Use of solvents, acid, or steam is not permitted. 

3. Remove loose mortar in masonry work. 

4. Replace mortar and fill open joints, holes, cracks and depressions with 
new mortar specified in Section 04 05 13, MASONRY MORTARING; Section 04 
05 16, MASONRY GROUTING. Do not fill weep holes. Finish to match 
adjacent surfaces. 

5. Neutralize Concrete floors to be painted by washing with a solution of 
1.4 Kg (3 pounds) of zinc sulfate crystals to 3.8 L (1 gallon) of 
water, allow to dry three days and brush thoroughly free of crystals. 

6. Repair broken and spalled concrete edges with concrete patching 
compound to match adjacent surfaces as specified in CONCRETE Sections. 
Remove projections to level of adjacent surface by grinding or similar 
methods. 

G. Gypsum Plaster and Gypsum Board: 

1. Remove efflorescence, loose and chalking plaster or finishing 
materials. 

2. Remove dust, dirt, and other deterrents to paint adhesion. 

3. Fill holes, cracks, and other depressions with CID-A-A-1272A [Plaster, 
Gypsum (Spackling Compound) finished flush with adjacent surface, with 
texture to match texture of adjacent surface. Patch holes over 25 mm 
(1-inch) in diameter as specified in Section for plaster or gypsum 
board. 


3.3 PAINT PREPARATION 

A. Thoroughly mix painting materials to ensure uniformity of color, complete 
dispersion of pigment and uniform composition. 

B. Do not thin unless necessary for application and when finish paint is used 
for body and prime coats. Use materials and quantities for thinning as 
specified in manufacturer's printed instructions. 

C. Remove paint skins, then strain paint through commercial paint strainer to 
remove lumps and other particles. 

D. Mix two component and two part paint and those requiring additives in such 
a manner as to uniformly blend as specified in manufacturer's printed 
instructions unless specified otherwise. 

E. For tinting required to produce exact shades specified, use color pigment 
recommended by the paint manufacturer. 

3.4 APPLICATION 

A. Start of surface preparation or painting will be construed as acceptance 
of the surface as satisfactory for the application of materials. 

B. Unless otherwise specified, apply paint in three coats; prime, body, and 
finish. When two coats applied to prime coat are the same, first coat 
applied over primer is body coat and second coat is finish coat. 

C. Apply each coat evenly and cover substrate completely. 

D. Allow not less than 48 hours between application of succeeding coats, 
except as allowed by manufacturer's printed instructions, and approved by 
Resident Engineer. 

E. Finish surfaces to show solid even color, free from runs, lumps, 
brushmarks, laps, holidays, or other defects. 

F. Apply by brush, roller or spray. 

G. Do not paint in closed position operable items such as access doors and 
panels, window sashes, overhead doors, and similar items except overhead 
roll-up doors and shutters. 

3.5 PRIME PAINTING 

A. After surface preparation prime surfaces before application of body and 
finish coats, except as otherwise specified. 

B. Spot prime and apply body coat to damaged and abraded painted surfaces 
before applying succeeding coats. 

C. Additional field applied prime coats over shop or factory applied prime 
coats are not required except for exterior exposed steel apply an 
additional prime coat. 

D. Prime rebates for stop and face glazing of wood, and for face glazing of 
steel. 

E. Wood and Wood Particleboard: 

1. Use same kind of primer specified for exposed face surface. 


a. Transparent finishes as specified under Transparent Finishes on Wood 
except Floors. 

5. Apply MPI 67 (Interior Latex Fire Retardant, Top-Coat (ULC Approved) 
(FR) to wood for fire retardant finish. 

F. Metals except boilers, incinerator stacks, and engine exhaust pipes: 

1. Steel and iron: MPI 95 (Fast Drying Metal Primer). G. Gypsum Board: 

1. Surfaces scheduled to have MPI 54 (Interior Latex, Semi-Gloss, MPI 
Gloss Level 5 (LE)). 

 

2. Primer: MPI 50(Interior Latex Primer Sealer) except use MPI 45 
(Interior Primer Sealer). 

3.7 INTERIOR FINISHES 

A. Apply following finish coats over prime coats in spaces or on surfaces 
specified. 

 

B. Metal Work: 

1. Apply to exposed surfaces. 

2. Omit body and finish coats on surfaces concealed after installation 
except electrical conduit containing conductors over 600 volts. 

3. Ferrous Metal, Galvanized Metal, and Other Metals Scheduled: 

a. Apply two coats of MPI 47 (Interior Alkyd, Semi-Gloss (AK)) unless 
specified otherwise. 

C. Gypsum Board: 

1. Two coats of MPI 52 (Interior Latex, MPI Gloss Level 3 (LE)) or MPI 54 

 (Interior Latex, Semi-Gloss, MPI Gloss Level 5 (LB)) as scheduled. 

F. Wood: 

1. Sanding: 

a. Use 220-grit sandpaper. 

b. Sand sealers and varnish between coats. 

c. Sand enough to scarify surface to assure good adhesion of subsequent 
coats, to level roughly applied sealer and varnish, and to knock off 
"whiskers" of any raised grain as well as dust particles. 

2. Sealers: 

a. Apply sealers specified except sealer may be omitted where 
pigmented, penetrating, or wiping stains containing resins are used. 

b. Allow manufacturer's recommended drying time before sanding, but not 
less than 24 hours or 36 hours in damp or muggy weather. 

c. Sand as specified. 

4. Transparent Finishes on Wood Except Floors. 

a. Natural Finish: 


2) Two coats of MPI 71 (Polyurethane, Moisture Cured, Clear Flat 
(PV)MPI 31 (Polyurethane, Moisture Cured, Clear Gloss (PV). 

 

I. Miscellaneous: 

1. Apply where specified. 

3.8 REFINISHING EXISTING PAINTED SURFACES 

A. Clean, patch and repair existing surfaces as specified under surface 
preparation. 

B. Remove and reinstall items as specified under surface preparation. 

C. Remove existing finishes or apply separation coats to prevent non 
compatible coatings from having contact. 

D. Patched or Replaced Areas in Surfaces and Components: Apply spot prime and 
body coats as specified for new work to repaired areas or replaced 
components. 

E. Except where scheduled for complete painting apply finish coat over plane 
surface to nearest break in plane, such as corner, reveal, or frame. 

F. In existing rooms and areas where alterations occur, clean existing 
stained and natural finished wood retouch abraded surfaces and then give 
entire surface one coat of MPI 31 (Polyurethane, Moisture Cured, Clear 
Gloss). 

G. Refinish areas as specified for new work to match adjoining work unless 
specified or scheduled otherwise. 

H. Coat knots and pitch streaks showing through old finish with MPI 36 (Knot 
Sealer) before refinishing. 

I. Sand or dull glossy surfaces prior to painting. 

J. Sand existing coatings to a feather edge so that transition between new 
and existing finish will not show in finished work. 

3.9 PAINT COLOR 

A. Color and gloss of finish coats is specified. 

B. For additional requirements regarding color see Articles, REFINISHING 
EXISTING PAINTED SURFACE and MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL FIELD PAINTING 
SCHEDULE. 

C. Coat Colors: 

1. Color of priming coat: Lighter than body coat. 

2. Color of body coat: Lighter than finish coat. 

3. Color prime and body coats to not show through the finish coat and to 
mask surface imperfections or contrasts. 

D. Painting, Caulking, Closures, and Fillers Adjacent to Casework: 

1. Paint to match color of casework where casework has a paint finish. 

2. Paint to match color of wall where casework is stainless steel, plastic 
laminate, or varnished wood. 


3.10 MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL WORK FIELD PAINTING SCHEDULE 

A. Field painting of mechanical and electrical consists of cleaning, 
touching-up abraded shop prime coats, and applying prime, body and finish 
coats to materials and equipment if not factory finished in space 
scheduled to be finished. 

B. In spaces not scheduled to be finish painted in the finish schedule, paint 
as specified under paragraph H, colors. 

C. Paint various systems specified in Division 02 – EXISTING CONDITIONS, 
Division 21 – FIRE SUPPRESSION, Division 22 - PLUMBING, Division 23 – 
HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR-CONDITIONING, Division 26 - ELECTRICAL, 
Division 27 - COMMUNICATIONS, and Division 28 – ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND 
SECURITY. 

D. Paint after tests have been completed. 

E. Omit prime coat from factory prime-coated items. 

F. Finish painting of mechanical and electrical equipment is not required 
when located in interstitial spaces, above suspended ceilings, in 
concealed areas such as pipe and electric closets, pipe basements, pipe 
tunnels, trenches, attics, roof spaces, shafts and furred spaces except on 
electrical conduit containing feeders 600 volts or more. 

G. Omit field painting of items specified in paragraph, Building and 
Structural WORK NOT PAINTED. 

H. Color: 

1. Paint items having no color specified to match surrounding surfaces. 

2. Paint colors as specified: 

 

a. White ....................Exterior unfinished surfaces of enameled 
plumbing fixtures. Insulation coverings on breeching and uptake 
inside boiler house, drums and drum-heads, oil heaters, condensate 
tanks and condensate piping. 

b. Gray: ......................Heating, ventilating, air conditioning 
and refrigeration equipment (except as required to match surrounding 
surfaces), and water and sewage treatment equipment and sewage 
ejection equipment. 

c. Aluminum Color: Ferrous metal on outside of boilers and in 
connection with boiler settings including supporting doors and door 
frames and fuel oil burning equipment, and steam generation system 
(bare piping, fittings, hangers, supports, valves, traps and 
miscellaneous iron work in contact with pipe). 

d. Federal Safety Red: Exposed fire protection piping hydrants, post 
indicators, electrical conducts containing fire alarm control 
wiring, and fire alarm equipment. 


e. Federal Safety Orange: .Entire lengths of electrical conduits 
containing feeders 600 volts or more. 

f. Color to match brickwork sheet metal covering on breeching outside 
of exterior wall of boiler house. 

I. Apply paint systems on properly prepared and primed surface as follows: 

2. Interior Locations: 

a. Apply two coats of MPI 47 (Interior Alkyd, Semi-Gloss (AK)) to 
following items: 

1) Metal under 94 degrees C (200 degrees F) of items such as bare 
piping, fittings, hangers and supports. 

2) Equipment and systems such as hinged covers and frames for 
control cabinets and boxes, cast-iron radiators, electric 
conduits and panel boards. 

3) Heating, ventilating, air conditioning, plumbing equipment, and 
machinery having shop prime coat and not factory finished. 

e. Paint electrical conduits containing cables rated 600 volts or more 
using two coats of MPI 9 (Exterior Alkyd Enamel (EO)) in the Federal 
Safety Orange color in exposed and concealed spaces full length of 
conduit. 

b. Cloth jackets of insulation of ducts and pipes in connection with 
plumbing, air conditioning, ventilating refrigeration and heating 
systems: One coat of MPI 50 (Interior Latex Primer Sealer) and one 
coat of MPI 11 (Exterior Latex Semi-Gloss (AE). 

3.11 BUILDING AND STRUCTURAL WORK FIELD PAINTING 

A. Painting and finishing of interior and exterior work except as specified 
under paragraph 3.11 B. 

1. Painting and finishing of new and existing work including colors and 
gloss of finish selected is specified in Finish Schedule. 

2. Painting of disturbed, damaged and repaired or patched surfaces when 
entire space is not scheduled for complete repainting or refinishing. 

3. Painting of ferrous metal and galvanized metal. 

4. Painting of wood with fire retardant paint exposed in attics, when used 
as mechanical equipment space. 

5. Identity painting and safety painting. 

B. Building and Structural Work not Painted: 

1. Prefinished items: 

a. Casework, doors, elevator entrances and cabs, metal panels, wall 
covering, and similar items specified factory finished under other 
sections. 

b. Factory finished equipment and pre-engineered metal building 
components such as metal roof and wall panels. 


2. Finished surfaces: 

a. Hardware except ferrous metal. 

b. Anodized aluminum, stainless steel, chromium plating, copper, and 
brass, except as otherwise specified. 

c. Signs, fixtures, and other similar items integrally finished. 

3. Concealed surfaces: 

a. Inside dumbwaiter, elevator and duct shafts, interstitial spaces, 
pipe basements, crawl spaces, pipe tunnels, above ceilings, attics, 
except as otherwise specified. 

b. Inside walls or other spaces behind access doors or panels. 

c. Surfaces concealed behind permanently installed casework and 
equipment. 

4. Moving and operating parts: 

a. Shafts, chains, gears, mechanical and electrical operators, 
linkages, and sprinkler heads, and sensing devices. 

b. Tracks for overhead or coiling doors, shutters, and grilles. 

5. Labels: 

a. Code required label, such as Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 
Inchcape Testing Services, Inc., or Factory Mutual Research 
Corporation. 

b. Identification plates, instruction plates, performance rating, and 
nomenclature. 

6. Galvanized metal: 

a. Exterior chain link fence and gates, corrugated metal areaways, and 
gratings. 

b. Gas Storage Racks. 

c. Except where specifically specified to be painted. 

7. Metal safety treads and nosings. 

 

9. Concrete curbs, gutters, pavements, retaining walls, exterior exposed 
foundations walls and interior walls in pipe basements. 

10. Face brick. 

11. Structural steel encased in concrete, masonry, or other enclosure. 

12. Structural steel to receive sprayed-on fire proofing. 

13. Ceilings, walls, columns in interstitial spaces. 

14. Ceilings, walls, and columns in pipe basements. 

15. Wood Shingles. 

 

3.12 IDENTITY PAINTING SCHEDULE 

A. Identify designated service in accordance with ANSI A13.1, unless 
specified otherwise, on exposed piping, piping above removable ceilings, 


piping in accessible pipe spaces, interstitial spaces, and piping behind 
access panels. 

1. Legend may be identified using 2.1 G options or by stencil 
applications. 

2. Apply legends adjacent to changes in direction, on branches, where 
pipes pass through walls or floors, adjacent to operating accessories 
such as valves, regulators, strainers and cleanouts a minimum of 12 000 
mm (40 feet) apart on straight runs of piping. Identification next to 
plumbing fixtures is not required. 

3. Locate Legends clearly visible from operating position. 

4. Use arrow to indicate direction of flow. 

5. Identify pipe contents with sufficient additional details such as 
temperature, pressure, and contents to identify possible hazard. Insert 
working pressure shown on drawings where asterisk appears for High, 
Medium, and Low Pressure designations as follows: 

a. High Pressure - 414 kPa (60 psig) and above. 

b. Medium Pressure - 104 to 413 kPa (15 to 59 psig). 

c. Low Pressure - 103 kPa (14 psig) and below. 

d. Add Fuel oil grade numbers. 

6. Legend name in full or in abbreviated form as follows: 

 

 COLOR OF COLOR OF COLOR OF LEGEND 

PIPING EXPOSED PIPING BACKGROUND LETTERS BBREVIATIONS 

 

Blow-off Yellow Black Blow-off 

Boiler Feedwater Yellow Black Blr Feed 

A/C Condenser Water Supply Green White A/C Cond Wtr Sup 

A/C Condenser Water Return Green White A/C Cond Wtr Ret 

Chilled Water Supply Green White Ch. Wtr Sup 

Chilled Water Return Green White Ch. Wtr Ret 

Shop Compressed Air Yellow Black Shop Air 

Air-Instrument Controls Green White Air-Inst Cont 

Drain Line Green White Drain 

Emergency Shower Green White Emg Shower 

High Pressure Steam Yellow Black H.P. ______* 

High Pressure Condensate Return Yellow Black H.P. Ret ____* 

Medium Pressure Steam Yellow Black M. P. Stm ____* 

Medium Pressure Condensate Return Yellow Black M.P. Ret _____* 

Low Pressure Steam Yellow Black L.P. Stm _____* 

Low Pressure Condensate Return Yellow Black L.P. Ret _____* 


High Temperature Water Supply Yellow Black H. Temp Wtr Sup 

High Temperature Water Return Yellow Black H. Temp Wtr Ret 

Hot Water Heating Supply Yellow Black H. W. Htg Sup 

Hot Water Heating Return Yellow Black H. W. Htg Ret 

Gravity Condensate Return Yellow Black Gravity Cond Ret 

Pumped Condensate Return Yellow Black Pumped Cond Ret 

Vacuum Condensate Return Yellow Black Vac Cond Ret 

Fuel Oil - Grade Brown White Fuel Oil-Grade __* 

(Diesel Fuel included under Fuel Oil) 

Boiler Water Sampling Yellow Black Sample 

Chemical Feed Yellow Black Chem Feed 

Continuous Blow-Down Yellow Black Cont. B D 

Pumped Condensate Black Pump Cond 

Pump Recirculating Yellow Black Pump-Recirc. 

Vent Line Yellow Black Vent 

Alkali Yellow Black Alk 

Bleach Yellow Black Bleach 

Detergent Yellow Black Det 

Liquid Supply Yellow Black Liq Sup 

Reuse Water Yellow Black Reuse Wtr 

Cold Water (Domestic) White Green White C.W. Dom 

Hot Water (Domestic) 

 Supply White Yellow Black H.W. Dom 

 Return White Yellow Black H.W. Dom Ret 

 Tempered Water White Yellow Black Temp. Wtr 

Ice Water 

 Supply White Green White Ice Wtr 

 Return White Green White Ice Wtr Ret 

Reagent Grade Water Green White RG 

Reverse Osmosis Green White RO 

Sanitary Waste Green White San Waste 

Sanitary Vent Green White San Vent 

Storm Drainage Green White St Drain 

Pump Drainage Green White Pump Disch 

Chemical Resistant Pipe 

 Waste Yellow Black Acid Waste 

 Vent Yellow Black Acid Vent 

Atmospheric Vent Green White ATV 

Silver Recovery Green White Silver Rec 


Oral Evacuation Green White Oral Evac 

Fuel Gas Yellow Black Gas 

Fire Protection Water 

 Sprinkler Red White Auto Spr 

 Standpipe Red White Stand 

 Sprinkler Red White Drain 

 

 

7. Electrical Conduits containing feeders over 600 volts, paint legends 
using 50 mm (2 inch) high black numbers and letters, showing the 
voltage class rating. Provide legends where conduits pass through walls 
and floors and at maximum 6100 mm (20 foot) intervals in between. Use 
labels with yellow background with black border and words Danger High 
Voltage Class, 5000, 15000, 25000. 

8. See Sections for methods of identification, legends, and abbreviations 
of the following: 

a. Regular compressed air lines: Section 22 15 00, GENERAL SERVICE 
COMPRESSED-AIR SYSTEMS. 

e. Medical Gases and vacuum lines: Section 22 62 00, VACUUM SYSTEMS FOR 
LABORATORY AND HEALTHCARE FACILITIES / Section 22 63 00, GAS SYSTEMS 
FOR LABORATORY AND HEALTHCARE FACILITIES. 

f. Conduits containing high voltage feeders over 600 volts: Section 26 
05 33, RACEWAY AND BOXES FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS / Section 27 05 33, 
RACEWAYS AND BOXES FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS / Section 28 05 33, 
RACEWAYS AND BOXES FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND SECURITY. 

B. Fire and Smoke Partitions: 

1. Identify partitions above ceilings on both sides of partitions except 
within shafts in letters not less than 64 mm (2 1/2 inches) high. 

2. Stenciled message: "SMOKE partition" or, "FIRE partition" as 
applicable. 

3. Locate not more than 6100 mm (20 feet) on center on corridor sides of 
partitions, and with a least one message per room on room side of 
partition. 

4. Use semigloss paint of color that contrasts with color of substrate. 

C. Identify columns in pipe basements and interstitial space: 

1. Apply stenciled number and letters to correspond with grid numbering 
and lettering shown. 

2. Paint numbers and letters 100 mm (4 inches) high, locate 450 mm (18 
inches) below overhead structural slab. 

3. Apply on four sides of interior columns and on inside face only of 
exterior wall columns. 


4. Color: 

a. Use black on concrete columns. 

b. Use white or contrasting color on steel columns. 

3.14 PROTECTION CLEAN UP, AND TOUCH-UP 

A. Protect work from paint droppings and spattering by use of masking, drop 
cloths, removal of items or by other approved methods. 

B. Upon completion, clean paint from hardware, glass and other surfaces and 
items not required to be painted of paint drops or smears. 

C. Before final inspection, touch-up or refinished in a manner to produce 
solid even color and finish texture, free from defects in work which was 
damaged or discolored. 

- - - E N D - - - 

APPENDIX 

 

Paint or coating Abbreviation 

Acrylic Emulsion AE (MPI 10 – flat/MPI 11 – semigloss/MPI 119 - gloss) 

Alkyd Flat Ak (MPI 49) 

Alkyd Gloss Enamel G (MPI 48) 

Alkyd Semigloss Enamel SG (MPI 47) 

Aluminum Paint AP (MPI 1) 

Cementitious Paint CEP (TT-P-1411) 

Exterior Latex EL??(MPI 10 / 11 / 119)?? 

Exterior Oil EO (MPI 9 – gloss/MPI 8 – flat/MPI 94 – semigloss) 

Epoxy Coating EC (MPI 77 – walls, floors/MPI 108 – CMU, concrete) 

Fire Retardant Paint FR (MPI 67) 

Fire Retardant Coating (Clear) FC (MPI 66, intumescent type) 

Floor Enamel FE (MPI 27 – gloss/MPI 59 – eggshell) 

Heat Resistant Paint HR (MPI 22) 

Latex Emulsion LE (MPI 53, flat/MPI 52, eggshell/MPI 54, semigloss/MPI 
114, gloss Level 6 

Latex Flat LF (MPI 138) 

Latex Gloss LG (MPI 114) 

Latex Semigloss SG (MPI 141) 

Latex Low Luster LL (MPI 139) 

Plastic Floor Coating PL 

Polyurethane Varnish PV (MPI 31 – gloss/MPI 71 - flat) 

Rubber Paint RF (CID-A-A-3120 - Paint for Swimming Pools (RF)). 

Water Paint, Cement WPC (CID-A-A-1555 - Water Paint, Powder). 

Wood Stain WS (MPI 90) 

Verify abbreviations used in the following coating sections: 

Section 09 96 59, HIGH-BUILD GLAZED COATINGS GC 


Section 09 94 19, MULTICOLOR INTERIOR FINISHING MC 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 10 11 13 
TACKBOARDS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies tackboards (bulletin boards). 

B. Boards may be either factory or field assembled. 

C. Where shown, assemble both tackboards into a single unit. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

 Color of tackboard surface: 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

 Boards shall be the products of one manufacturer. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings: Identifying all parts by name and material and showing 
design, construction, installation, anchorage and relation to adjacent 
construction. 

C. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Bulletin board. 

D. Samples: 

1. Tackboard surface, 300 by 300 mm (six by six inches), each color, 
mounted on backing. 

2. Integrally colored anodized aluminum, 300 mm (six inch) length. 

3. Each accessory (after approval, may be used in the work). 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM): 

AMP 500 Series..........Metal Finishes Manual 

AMP 501.................Finishes for Aluminum 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

B221/B221M-02...........Aluminum and Aluminum Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, 
Wire, Shapes and Tubes 

D. Porcelain Enamel Institute (PEI): 

 Architectural Porcelain Enamel on Steel for Exterior Use - 1965 

E. American Hardboard Association (AHBA): 

A135.4-95...............Basic Hardboard 

F. Composite Panel Association (CPA): 

A208.1-93...............Wood Particleboard 


PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 BULLETIN BOARD 

 Bulletin board shall consist of a tackboard, snap on aluminum frame, and 
other items specified and shown. 

2.2 FABRICATION 

A. Materials: 

1. Aluminum, extruded: ASTM B221. 

2. Cork: ASTM F104, Type II, mildew resistant, Class 2. 

3. Backing: Hardboard, AHBA A135.4 or particleboard, CPA A208.1. 

B. Components: 

1. Tackboard: Cork face, 6 mm (1/4-inch) thick factory laminated to a 
hardboard or particleboard backing. 

2. Frames (Trim): Extruded aluminum, 1.5 mm (0.060-inch) thick, snap-on 
type, approximate face width 44 mm (1-3/4 inch), depth and 
configuration as required to return to wall and engage clips. 

3. Accessories: Fabricate from aluminum with holders from spring steel. 
Design to suit display rail. Furnish accessories as follows: 

 Lineal mm (feet) of rail 

 Accessory Type per accessory 

 Combination map hook and paper holder. ___2’_0”____ 

4. Clips: Manufacturer's standard as required to support frame, 
mullions, display rail, and trough. 

C. Bulletin boards 3660 mm (12 feet) or less in length shall be in one 
piece. 

D. Finish exposed aluminum surfaces as follows: 

1. AA 45 chemically etched medium matte, with clear anodic coating Class 
II Architectural, 0.4 mils thick (AA-M12C22A32). 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION, GENERAL 

A. Install units in accordance with the manufacturer's installation 
instructions, use concealed fasteners. 

B. Inspect surfaces and related construction to receive units. Partitions 
shall have reinforcing to receive fasteners. Verify type and placement 
of reinforcement. 

C. Do not proceed with the installation until reinforcement is in place and 
surfaces are flat. 

D. Assemble units as specified by the manufacturer. 

3.2 INSTALLATION OF MARKERBOARD AND BULLETIN BOARD: 

A. Mount bulletin boards with adhesive and blocking pads spaced 16 inches 
on center each way. 


B. Miter trim at corners, conceal fasteners. Modify trim as required to 
conform to surrounding construction details. 

C. Location and Size Schedule see QH SERIES SHEET 

 

- - - E N D - - - 

 


SECTION 10 11 23 
TACKBOARDS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies tackboards (bulletin boards) and glass door 
bulletin boards and related items. 

B. Boards may be either factory or field assembled. 

C. Where shown, assemble both chalkboards and tackboards into a single 
unit. 

1.2 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

 Boards shall be the products of one manufacturer. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings: Identifying all parts by name and material and showing 
design, construction, installation, anchorage and relation to adjacent 
construction. 

C. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Bulletin board. 

2. Glass door bulletin board. 

D. Samples: 

1. Tackboard, 300 by 300 mm (six by six inches), each color, mounted on 
backing. 

2. Integrally colored anodized aluminum, 300 mm (six inch) length. 

3. Cork filled map rail, 300 mm (six inch) length. 

4. Each accessory (after approval, may be used in the work). 

1.4 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM): 

AMP 500 Series..........Metal Finishes Manual 

AMP 501.................Finishes for Aluminum 

C. American National Standards Institute(ANSI): 

Z97.1-09................Safety Glazing Materials Used in Buildings - 
Safety Performance Specifications and Methods 
of Test 


D. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

B221/B221M-08...........Aluminum and Aluminum Alloy Extruded Bars, 
Rods, Wire, Shapes and Tubes 

C1036-06................Flat Glass 

C1048-04................Heat-Treated Flat Glass-Kind HS, Kind FT Coated 
and Uncoated Glass 

F104-03(R2009)..........Nonmetallic Gasket Materials 

E. Composite Panel Association (CPA): 

A208.1-09...............Particleboard 

A135.4-04...............Basic Hardboard 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 BULLETIN BOARD 

 Bulletin board shall consist of a tackboard, snap on aluminum frame, 
grounds and other items specified and shown. 

2.2 GLASS DOOR BULLETIN BOARD 

 Glass door bulletin board shall consist of a tackboard, aluminum 
tubular frame, sliding aluminum framed glazed doors and other items 
specified and shown. 

2.3 FABRICATION 

A. Materials: 

1. Aluminum, extruded: ASTM B221. 

2. Cork: ASTM F104, Type II, mildew resistant, Class 2. 

 

3. Backing: Hardboard, AHBA A135.4 or particleboard, CPA A208.1. 

B. Components: 

1. Tackboard: Cork face, 6 mm (1/4-inch) thick factory laminated to a 
hardboard or particleboard backing 6 mm to 9 mm (1/4 to 3/8-inch) 
thick. 

2. Frames (Trim): Extruded aluminum, 1.5 mm (0.060-inch) thick, snap-on 
type, approximate face width 44 mm (1-3/4 inch), depth and 
configuration as required to return to wall and engage clips. 

3. Display Rail: Snap-on type, same materials as frames, approximate 
face width one inch with 6 mm (1/4-inch) thick cork insert. 

4. Mullions: Snap-on type, same material and face width as frames, 
designed to finish flush with frame. 

5. Grounds: Continuous zinc-coated (galvanized) steel or extruded 
aluminum members designed to support the tackboard and clips for 
snap-on frames, and map rail 


6. Clips: Manufacturer's standard as required to support frame, 
mullions, and display rail, 

7. Tubular Frame (For glass door bulletin board): Extruded aluminum, 
2.34 mm (0.092 inches) thick; tubular or open back in section, with 
flanges for concealed attachment, designed to support door hardware 
and tackboard. 

C. Bulletin boards 3660 mm (12 feet) or less in length shall be in one 
piece. 

D. Finish exposed aluminum surfaces as follows: 

1. AA 45 chemically etched medium matte, with clear anodic coating 
Class II Architectural, 0.4 mils thick (AA-M12C22A32). 

2. AA 45 chemically etched medium matte, with integrally colored anodic 
coating, Class II Architectural, 0.4 mils thick (AA-M12C22A32, of 
color to match approved sample). 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION, GENERAL 

A. Install units in accordance with the manufacturer's installation 
instructions, use concealed fasteners. 

B. Inspect surfaces and related construction to receive units. Partitions 
shall have reinforcing to receive fasteners. Verify type and placement 
of reinforcement. 

C. Do not proceed with the installation until reinforcement is in place 
and surfaces are flat. 

D. Assemble units as specified by the manufacturer. 

3.2 INSTALLATION OF BULLETIN BOARD: 

A. (Except glass door bulletin boards): 

1. Mount bulletin boards with adhesive and blocking pads spaced 16 
inches on center each way. 

2. Grounds designed to receive clips for snap-on trim shall be 
continuous and be secured 300 mm (12 inches) on center. Space clips 
300 mm (12 inches) on center. 

3. Miter trim at corners, conceal fasteners. Modify trim as required to 
conform to surrounding construction details. 

3.3 INSTALLATION OF GLASS DOOR BULLETIN BOARDS 

A. Glass door bulletin board units shall be factory assembled, except 
tackboard may be either field mounted or shop mounted on frame. 


B. Mounting bolts or screws shall be oval head of stainless steel or 
chromium plated steel or brass. Space fasteners 500 mm (20 inches) on 
center, except not less than three fasteners each side, top and bottom. 
Heads of fasteners shall not show on the frame face. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 10 14 00 
SIGNAGE 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies interior signage for room numbers, directional 
signs, code required signs, telephone identification signs and temporary 
interior signs. 

B. This section also specifies exterior medical center identification 
signs, building identification signs, parking and traffic signs. 

C. Installation of Government furnished dedication plaque and VA seal. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Electrical: Related Electrical Specification Sections. 

B. Lighted EXIT signs for egress purposes are specified under Division 26, 
ELECTRICAL. 

C. Section 10 13 00, DIRECTORIES and Section 10 14 00, SIGNAGE. 

D. Color Finish: Section 09 06 00, SCHEDULE FOR FINISHES. 

E. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 MANUFACTURER'S QUALIFICATIONS 

 Sign manufacturer shall provide evidence that they regularly and 
presently manufactures signs similar to those specified in this section 
as one of their principal products. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 00, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Samples: Sign panels and frames, with letters and symbols, each type. 
Submit 2 sets. One set of samples will be retained by Resident Engineer, 
other returned to Contractor. 

1. Sign Panel, 200 mm x 250 mm (8 inches x 10 inches), with letters. 

2. Color samples of each color, 150 mm x 150 mm (6 inches x 6 inches. 
Show anticipated range of color and texture. 

3. Sample of typeface, arrow and symbols in a typical full size layout. 

C. Manufacturer's Literature: 

1. Showing the methods and procedures proposed for the concealed 
anchorage of the signage system to each surface type. 

2. Manufacturer’s printed specifications, anchorage details, 
installation and maintenance instructions. 

D. Samples: Sign location plan, showing location, type and total number of 
signs required. 


E. Shop Drawings: Scaled for manufacture and fabrication of sign types. 
Identify materials, show joints, welds, anchorage, accessory items, 
mounting and finishes. 

F. Full size layout patterns for dimensional letters. 

1.5 DELIVERY AND STORAGE 

A. Deliver materials to job in manufacturer's original sealed containers 
with brand name marked thereon. Protect materials from damage. 

B. Package to prevent damage or deterioration during shipment, handling, 
storage and installation. Maintain protective covering in place and in 
good repair until removal is necessary. 

C. Deliver signs only when the site and mounting services are ready for 
installation work to proceed. 

D. Store products in dry condition inside enclosed facilities. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

B209-07.................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate 

B221-08.................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, 
Wire, Shapes, and tubes. 

C. Federal Specifications (Fed Spec): 

MIL-PRF-8184F...........Plastic Sheet, Acrylic, Modified. 

MIL-P-46144C............Plastic Sheet, Polycarbonate 

1.7 MINIMUM SIGN REQUIREMENTS 

A. Permanent Rooms and Spaces: 

1. Tactile and Braille Characters, raised minimum 0.793 mm (1/32 in). 
Characters shall be accompanied by Grade 2 Braille. 

2. Type Styles: Characters shall be uppercase, Helvetica Medium, 
Helvetica Medium Condensed and Helvetica Regular. 

3. Character Height: Minimum 16 mm (5/8 in) high, Maximum 50 mm (2 in). 

4. Symbols (Pictograms): Equivalent written description shall be placed 
directly below symbol, outside of symbol's background field. Border 
dimensions of symbol background shall be minimum 150 mm (6 in) high. 

5. Finish and Contrast: Characters and background shall be eggshell, 
matte or other non-glare finish with adequate contrast with 
background. 

6. Mounting Location and Height: As shown. Mounted on wall adjacent to 
the latch side of the door and to avoid door swing and protruding 
objects. 

B. Overhead Signs: 


1. Type Styles: As shown. Characters shall have a width-to-height ratio 
between 3:5 and 1:1. Characters shall have a stroke width-to-height 
ratio of between 1:5 and 1:10. 

2. Character Height: minimum 75 mm (3 in) high for overhead signs. As 
shown, for directional signs. 

3. Finish and Contrast: Same as for signs of permanent rooms and spaces. 

4. Mounting Location and Height: As shown. 

1.8 COLORS AND FINISHES: 

Section 09 06 00, SCHEDULE FOR FINSIHES. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 GENERAL 

A. Signs of type, size and design shown on the drawings and as specified. 

B. Signs complete with lettering, framing and related components for a 
complete installation. 

C. Provide graphics items as completed units produced by a single 
manufacturer, including necessary mounting accessories, fittings and 
fastenings. 

D. Do not scale drawings for dimensions. Contractor to verify and be 
responsible for all dimensions and conditions shown by these drawings. 
Resident Engineer to be notified of any discrepancy in drawing, in field 
directions or conditions, and/or of any changes required for all such 
construction details. 

E. The Sign Contractor, by commencing work of this section, assumes overall 
responsibility, as part of his warranty of work, to assure that 
assemblies, components and parts shown or required within the work of 
the section, comply with the Contract Documents. The Contractor shall 
further warrant: That all components, specified or required to 
satisfactorily complete the installation are compatible with each other 
and with conditions of installations. 

2.2 PRODUCTS 

A. Aluminum: 

1. Sheet and Plate: ASTM B209. 

2. Extrusions and Tubing: ASTM B221. 

B. Cast Acrylic Sheet: MIL-PRF-8184F; Type II, class 1, Water white nonglare 
optically clear. Matt finish water white clear acrylic shall not 
be acceptable. 

C. Polycarbonate: MIL-P-46144C; Type I, class 1. 

D. Vinyl: 0.1 mm thick machine cut, having a pressure sensitive adhesive 
and integral colors. 

E. Electrical Signs: 


1. General: Furnish and install all lighting, electrical components, 
fixtures and lamps ready for use in accordance with the sign type 
drawings, details and specifications. 

2. Refer to Electrical Specifications Section, Division 26, ELECTRICAL, 
to verify line voltages for sign locations that require electrical 
signs. 

3. Quality Control: Installed electrical components and sign 
installations are to bear the label and certification of 
Underwriter’s Laboratories, Inc., and are to comply with National 
Electrical Code as well as applicable federal, state and local codes 
for installation techniques, fabrication methods and general product 
safety. 

4. Ballast and Lighting Fixtures: See Electrical Specifications. 

F. Concrete Post Footings: See Section 03 30 53, MISCELLANEOUS CAST-INPLACE 
CONCRETE, Cast-in-place Concrete. 

G. Steel: See Section 05 12 00, STRUCTURAL STEEL FRAMING. 

2.3 SIGN STANDARDS 

A. Topography: 

1. Type Style: Helvetica Medium and Helvetica Medium Condensed. Initial 
caps or all caps as indicated in Sign Message Schedule. 

2. Arrow: See graphic standards in drawings. 

3. Letter spacing: See graphic standards on drawings. 

4. Letter spacing: See graphic standards on drawings. 

5. All text, arrows, and symbols to be provided in size, colors, 
typefaces and letter spacing shown. Text shall be a true, clean, 
accurate reproduction of typeface(s) shown. Text shown in drawings 
are for layout purposes only; final text for signs is listed in Sign 
Message Schedule. 

B. Project Colors and Finishes: See Section 09 06 00, SCHEDULE FOR 
FINISHES. 

2.4 SIGN TYPES 

A. General: 

1. The interior sign system is comprised of sign types families that are 
identified by a letter and number which identify a particular group 
of signs. An additional number identifies a specific type of sign 
within that family. 

a. IN indicates a component construction based sign. 

1. The exterior sign system shall be comprised of sign types families 
that are identified by a letter and number which identify a 
particular group of signs. An additional number identifies a specific 
type of sign within that family. 

2. EI designation indicates exterior internally illuminated sign. 


3. EN designation indicates exterior non-illuminated sign. 

B. Interchangeable Component System: 

1. Sign Type Families: 03, 04, 05, 06, 07, 08, 09 10, 11 12, 13, 14, 15, 
16 and 17. 

2. Interior sign system capable of being arranged in a variety of 
configurations with a minimum of attachments, devices and connectors. 

a. Interchangeable nature of the system shall allow for changes of 
graphic components of the installed sign, without changing sign in 
its entirety. 

b. Component Sign System is comprised of the following primary 
components: 

1) Rail Back utilizing horizontal rails, spaced to allow for 
uniform, modular sizing of sign types. 

2) Rail Insert mounted to back of Copy Panels to allow for 
attachment to Rail Back. 

3) Copy Panels, made of a variety of materials to allow for 
different graphic needs. 

4) End Caps which interlock to Rail Back to enclose and secure 
changeable Copy Panels. 

5) Joiners and Accent Joiners connect separate Rail Backs 
together. 

6) Top Accent Bars which provide decorative trim cap that encloses 
the top of sign or can connect the sign to a Type 03 Room 
Number Sign. 

c. Rail Back, Rail Insert and End Caps in anodized extruded aluminum 
to allow for tight tolerances and consistent quality of fit and 
finish. 

d. Signs in system shall be convertible in the field to allow for 
enlargement from one size to another in height and width through 
use of Joiners or Accent Joiners, which connect Rail Back panels 
together blindly, providing a butt joint between Copy Panels. 
Accent Joiners shall connect Rail Backs together with a visible 3 
mm (1/8") horizontal rib, flush to the adjacent copy insert 
surfaces. 

e. Sign configurations shall vary in width from 225 mm (9 inches) to 
2050 mm (80 inches), and have height dimensions of 50 mm (2 
inches), 75 mm (3 inches), 150 mm (6 inches), 225 mm (9 inches) 
and 300 mm (12 inches). Height shall be increased beyond 300 mm 
(12 inches), by repeating height module in full or in part. 

3. Rail Back functions as internal structural member of sign using 
6063T5 extruded aluminum and anodized black. 


a. Shall accept an extruded aluminum or plastic insert on one sign or 
on both sides, depending upon sign type. 

b. Shall be convertible in field to allow for connection to other 
Rail Back panels, so that additive changes can be made to sign 
unit. 

c. Rail shall allow for a variety of mounting devices including wall 
mounting for screw-on applications, using pressure sensitive tape, 
freestanding mount, ceiling mount and other mounting devices as 
needed. 

4. Rail Insert functions as a mounting device for Copy Panels on to the 
Rail Back. The Rail Insert mounts to the back of the Copy Panel with 
adhesive suitable for use with the particular copy insert material. 

a. Shall allow Copy Panels to slide or snap into the horizontal Rail 
Back for ease of changeability. 

b. Shall mount to the back of the Copy Panel with adhesive suitable 
for use with particular Copy Panel material. 

5. Copy Panels shall accept various forms of copy and graphics, and 
attaches to the Rail Back with the Rail Insert. Copy Panels shall be 
either ABS plastic with integral color or an acrylic lacquer finish; 
photo polymer; or, acrylic. 

a. Interchangeable by sliding horizontally from either side of sign, 
and to other signs in system of equal or greater width or height. 

b. Cleanable without use of special chemicals or cleaning solutions. 

c. Copy Insert Materials. 

1) ABS Inserts - 2.3 mm (.090 inches) extruded ABS plastic core 
with .07 mm (.003 inches) acrylic cap bonded during 
extrusion/texturing process. Pressure bonded to extruded Rail 
Insert using adhesive. Background color is either integral or 
painted in acrylic lacquer. ABS inserts finished in a chromium 
industries #HM335RA texture pattern to prevent glare. 

2) Photo polymer Inserts - 3 mm (.125 inches) phenolic photo 
polymer with raised copy etched to 2.3 mm (.0937 inches), 
bonded to an ABS plastic or extruded aluminum insert with 
adhesive. Background color is painted in acrylic enamel. 

3) Changeable Paper/ Insert Holder - Extruded insert holder with 
integral Rail Insert for connection with structural back panel 
in 6063T5 aluminum with a black anodized finish. Inserts into 
holder are paper with a clear 0.7 mm (.030 inches) textured 
cover. Background color is painted in acrylic lacquer. 


4) Acrylic - 2 mm (.080 inches) non-glare acrylic. Pressure bonded 
to extruded Rail Insert using adhesive. Background color is 
painted in acrylic lacquer or acrylic enamel. 

5) Extruded 6063T5 aluminum with a black anodized finish Insert 
Holder with integral Rail Insert for connection with Structural 
Back Panel to hold a 0.7 mm (.030 inches) textured 
polycarbonate insert and a Sliding Tile which mounts in the 
Inset Holder and slides horizontally. 

6) End Caps - Extruded using 6063T5 aluminum with a black 
anodized. End Caps interlock with Rail Back with clips to form 
an integral unit, enclosing and securing the changeable Copy 
Panels, without requiring tools for assembly. 

a) Shall be interchangeable to either end of sign and to other 
signs in the system of equal height. 

b) Mechanical fasteners can be added to the End Caps that will 
secure it to Rail Back to make sign tamper resistant. 

7) Joiners - Extruded using 6063T5 aluminum with a black anodized 
finish. Rail Joiners connect Rail Backs together blindly, 
providing a butt joint between Copy Inserts. 

8) Accent Joiners - Extruded using 6063T5 aluminum with a mirror 
polished finish. Joiner shall connect Rail Backs together with 
a visible 3 mm (.125 inches) horizontal rib, flush to the 
adjacent Copy Panel surfaces. 

9) Top Accent Rail - Extruded using 6063T5 aluminum with a mirror 
polished finish. Rail shall provide 3 mm (.125 inches) high 
decorative trim cap, which butts flush to adjacent Copy Panel 
and encloses top of Rail Back and Copy Panel. 

10) Typography 

a) Vinyl First Surface Copy (non-tactile) - Applied Vinyl copy. 

b) Subsurface Copy Inserts - Textured 1 mm (.030 inches) clear 
polycarbonate face with subsurface applied Vinyl copy. Face 
shall be back sprayed with paint and laminated to an 
extruded aluminum carrier insert. 

c) Integral Tactile Copy Inserts - phenolic photo polymer 
etched with 2.3 mm (.0937 inches) raised copy. 

d) Silk-screened First Surface Copy (non-tactile) - Injection 
molded or extruded ABS plastic or aluminum insert with first 
surface applied enamel silk-screened copy. 

 

C. Sign Type Family 01, 02.01 thru 02.05, 08, 09 and 20: 

1. All text and graphics are to be first surface silk-screened. 


2. IN-01.12 & IN-01.13: Refer to Sign Type 03 specification for tactile 
and Braille portion of sign. 

3. IN-02.4: All text and graphics are to be first surface vinyl letters. 

4. IN-01.1: Preparation of artwork for reproduction of "fire and 
emergency evacuation maps" is by manufacturer. 

D. Sign Type Families 03: 

1. Tactile sign is to be made from a material that provides for letters, 
numbers and Braille to be integral with sign plaque material such as: 
photosensitive polyamide resin, etched metal, sandblasted phenolic or 
embossed material. Do not apply letters, numbers and Braille with 
adhesive. 

2. Numbers, letters and Braille to be raised 0.793 mm (.0312 inches) 
from the background surface. The draft of the letters, numbers and 
Braille to be tapered, vertical and clean. 

3. Braille dots are to conform with standard dimensions for literary 
Braille; (a) Dot base diameter: 1.5 mm (.059 inches) (b) Inter-dot 
spacing: 2.3 mm (.090 inches) (c) Horizontal separation between 
cells: 6.0 mm (.241 inches) (d) Vertical separation between cells: 
10.0 mm (.395 inches) 

4. Entire assembly is painted in specified color. After painting, apply 
white or other specified color to surface of the numbers and letters. 
Entire sign is to have a protective clear coat sealant applied. 

5. Complete sign is to have an eggshell finish (11 to 19 degree on a 60 
degree glossmeter). 

E. Sign Type Family 04 and 11: 

1. All text and graphics are to be first surface applied vinyl letters. 

2. IN-04: When a Type IN-04 is to be mounted under a Type IN03, a 
connecting Accent Joiner is to be used to create a singular 
integrated sign. 

F. Sign Type 05: 

1. Text if added to Copy Insert module to be first surface applied vinyl 
letters. 

G. Sign Type Family 06 and 07: 

1. A11 text and graphics are to be first surface applied vinyl letters 
except for under sliding tile. 

2. Protect text, which is covered by sliding tile, so tile does not wear 
away letters. 

H. Sign Type Family 10: 

1. Pocket depth is to be 0.3 mm (.0150 inches). 

I. Sign Type Family 12 and 13: 

1. A11 text and graphics are to be first surface applied vinyl letters. 


2. IN-12: Provide felt, cork or similar material on bottom of desk 
mounting bracket to protect counter surfaces. 

J. Sign Type Family 14, 15,and 16: 

1. A11 text and graphics are to be first surface applied vinyl letters. 

2. IN-14.06: When added to top of IN-14.01, IN-14.04, or IN-14.05 a 
connecting Accent Joiner is to be used to create a singular 
integrated sign. 

3. Ceiling mounted signs required mounting hardware on the sign that 
allows for sign disconnection, removal and reinstallation and 
reconnection. 

K. Sign Type Family 17: 

1. A11 text and graphics are to be first surface applied vinyl letters. 

2. IN-17: Directory constructed using elements of the Component System. 

L. Sign Type Family 18: 

1. A11 text and graphics are to be first surface applied stylus cut 
vinyl letters. 

2. Provide in specified typeface, color and spacing, with each message 
or message group on a single quick release backing sheet. 

M. Sign Type Family 19: 

1. Dimensional letters are mill or laser cut acrylic in the size and 
thickness noted in the drawings. 

2. Draft of letters is perpendicular to letters face. 

3. All corners such as where a letter stem and bar intersect are to be 
square so the letter form is accurately reproduced. 

4. Paint letters with acrylic polyurethane in specified color and 
finish. 

N. Sign Type Family (See Specialty Signs Section) 21: 

1. IN-21.01: 57 mm (2.25 inches) polished aluminum tube mounted to 
weighted 356 mm (14 inches) diameter polished aluminum base. Sign 
bracket to hold a 6 mm (.25 inches) sign plaque. 

2. IN-21.02: 57 mm (2.25 inches) polished aluminum tube vertical support 
mounted to a weighted polished 57 mm (2.25 inches) aluminum tubular 
base. Rail Back mechanically connected to vertical supports with Copy 
Panel attached to front and back. 

3. IN-21.03 & 21.04: IN-21.02: 57 mm (2.25 inches) polished aluminum 
tube vertical support mounted to a weighted polished 57 mm (2.25 
inches) aluminum tubular base. Rail Back mechanically connected to 
vertical supports with hinged locking glass door. Black felt covered 
changeable letter board or tan vinyl impregnated cork tack surface as 
background within case. 

O. Sign Type Family 22: 


1. IN-22.01: Extruded aluminum clip anodized black containing rollers to 
pinch and release paper. End caps are black plastic. 

2. IN-22.02: Patient Information holder constructed of 18 gauge formed 
sheet metal painted in specified color. Polished aluminum connecting 
rods and buttons. Button covers for mounting screws are to 
permanently attach and securely conceal screws. 

P. Temporary Interior Signs: 

1. Fabricated from 50 kg (110 pound) matte finished white paper cut to 
100 mm (4 inch) wide by 300 mm (12 inch) long. Punched 3 mm (.125 
inch) hole with edge of hole spaced 13 mm (.5 inch) in from edge and 
centered on 100 mm (4 inch) side. Reinforce hole on both sides with 
suitable material that prevents tie form pulling through hole. Ties 
are steel wire 0.3 mm (0.120 inch) thick attached to tag with twist 
leaving 150 mm (6 inch) long free ends. 

2. Mark architectural room number on sign, with broad felt marker in 
clearly legible numbers or letters that identify room, corridor or 
space as shown on floor plans. 

3. Install temporary signs to all rooms that have a room, corridor or 
space number. Attach to door frame, door knob or door pull. 

a. Doors that do not require signs are: corridor doors in corridor 
with same number, folding doors or partitions, toilet doors, 
bathroom doors within and between rooms, closet doors within 
rooms, communicating doors in partitions between rooms with 
corridor entrance doors. 

b. Replace and missing damaged or illegible signs. 

2.5 FABRICATION 

A. Design components to allow for expansion and contraction for a minimum 
material temperature range of 56 °C (100 °F), without causing buckling, 
excessive opening of joints or over stressing of adhesives, welds and 
fasteners. 

B. Form work to required shapes and sizes, with true curve lines and 
angles. Provide necessary rebates, lugs and brackets for assembly of 
units. Use concealed fasteners whenever and wherever possible. 

C. Shop fabricate so far as practicable. Joints fastened flush to conceal 
reinforcement, or welded where thickness or section permits. 

D. Contact surfaces of connected members be true. Assembled so joints will 
be tight and practically unnoticeable, without use of filling compound. 

E. Signs shall have fine, even texture and be flat and sound. Lines and 
miters sharp, arises unbroken, profiles accurate and ornament true to 
pattern. Plane surfaces be smooth flat and without oil-canning, free of 


rack and twist. Maximum variation from plane of surface plus or minus 
0.3 mm (0.015 inches). Restore texture to filed or cut areas. 

F. Level or straighten wrought work. Members shall have sharp lines and 
angles and smooth su1rfaces. 

G. Extruded members to be free from extrusion marks. Square turns and 
corners sharp, curves true. 

H. Drill holes for bolts and screws. Conceal fastenings where possible. 
Exposed ends and edges mill smooth, with corners slightly rounded. Form 
joints exposed to weather to exclude water. 

I. Finish hollow signs with matching material on all faces, tops, bottoms 
and ends. Edge joints tightly mitered to give appearance of solid 
material. 

J. All painted surfaces properly primed. Finish coating of paint to have 
complete coverage with no light or thin applications allowing substrate 
or primer to show. Finished surface smooth, free of scratches, gouges, 
drips, bubbles, thickness variations, foreign matter and other 
imperfections. 

K. Movable parts, including hardware, are be cleaned and adjusted to 
operate as designed without binding of deformation of members. Doors and 
covers centered in opening or frame. All contact surfaces fit tight and 
even without forcing or warping components. 

L. Pre-assemble items in shop to greatest extent possible to minimize field 
splicing and assembly. Disassemble units only as necessary for shipping 
and handling limitations. Clearly mark units for re-assembly and 
coordinated installation. 

M. No signs are to be manufactured until final sign message schedule and 
location review has been completed by the Resident Engineer & forwarded 
to contractor. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Protect products against damage during field handling and installation. 
Protect adjacent existing and newly placed construction, landscaping and 
finishes as necessary to prevent damage during installation. Paint and 
touch up any exposed fasteners and connecting hardware to match color 
and finish of surrounding surface. 

B. Mount signs in proper alignment, level and plumb according to the sign 
location plan and the dimensions given on elevation and sign location 
drawings. Where otherwise not dimensioned, signs shall be installed 
where best suited to provide a consistent appearance throughout the 
project. When exact position, angle, height or location is in doubt, 
contact Resident Engineer for clarification. 


C. Contractor shall be responsible for all signs that are damaged, lost or 
stolen while materials are on the job site and up until the completion 
and final acceptance of the job. 

D. Remove or correct signs or installation work Resident Engineer 
determines as unsafe or as an unsafe condition. 

E. At completion of sign installation, clean exposed sign surfaces. Clean 
and repair any adjoining surfaces and landscaping that became soiled or 
damaged as a result of installation of signs. 

F. Locate signs as shown on the Sign Location Plans. 

G. Certain signs may be installed on glass. A blank glass back up is 
required to be placed on opposite side of glass exactly behind sign 
being installed. This blank glass back up is to be the same size as sign 
being installed. 

H. Contractor will be responsible for verifying that behind each sign 
location there are no utility lines that will be affected by 
installation of signs. Any damage during installation of signs to 
utilities will be the sole responsibility of the Contractor to correct 
and repair. 

I. Furnish inserts and anchoring devices which must be set in concrete or 
other material for installation of signs. Provide setting drawings, 
templates, instructions and directions for installation of anchorage 
devices which may involve other trades. 

- - - END - - - 


SECTION 10 21 23 
CUBICLE CURTAIN TRACKS 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies cubicle curtain track (C.C.T.) 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Steel shapes for suspending track assembly: Section 05 50 00, METAL 
FABRICATIONS and Section 09 51 00, ACOUSTICAL CEILINGS. 

B. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Samples: 

 One 300 mm (12 inch) long piece of cubicle curtain track with carrier 
access and end stop. One clip anchor for fastening track to grid system 
of acoustical 

C. Shop Drawings: Showing layout of tracks and method of anchorage. 

D. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

 Cubicle curtain track. 

1.4 DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 

A. Deliver material in original package marked to identify the contents, 
brand name, and the name of the manufacturer or supplier. 

B. Store in dry and protected location. Store so as to not bend or warp 
the tracks. 

C. Do not open packages until contents are needed for installation, unless 
verification inspection is required. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

B221-08.................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, 
Rods, Wire, Shapes, and Tubes. 

B456-03(R2009)..........Electrodeposited Coatings for Copper Plus 
Nickel Plus Chromium and Nickel Plus Chromium 

C. The National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM): 

AMP 500 Series..........Metal Finishes Manual 


PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 CUBICLE CURTAIN TRACKS 

A. Surface mounted: 

1. Channel Tracks (Surface Mounted Type): Extruded aluminum, ASTM B221, 
alloy 6063, temper T5 or T6, channel shaped, with smooth inside 
raceway for curtain carriers. 

B. Curtain Carriers: Nylon or delrin carriers, with either nylon or delrin 
wheels on metal, delrin, or nylon axles. Equip each carrier with either 
stainless steel, chromium plated brass or steel hooks with swivel, or 
nickel chromium plated brass or stainless steel bead chain and hook 
assembly, or delrin carriers may have moulded on delrin hooks. Hook for 
bead chain may be the same material and finish as the bead chain or may 
be chromium plated steel. Provide 2.2 carriers for every 300 mm 
(onefoot) of each section of each track length, plus one additional 
carrier. 

C. End Stop Connectors, Ceiling Flanges and Other Accessories: Fabricate 
from the same material with the same finish as the tracks or from 
nylon. 

D. Hangers and Fittings: Fabricate from the same material with the same 
finish as the tracks. Hangers may be round or square for channel tracks 
and round for tubular tracks. Design fittings to be compatible with 
design of tracks and to safely transmit the track load to the hangers. 

E. At end of each section of track, make provision for insertion and 
removal of carriers. Design to prevent accidental removal of carrier. 
Any operating mechanism shall be removable with common tools. 

2.3 FASTENERS 

A. Exposed Fasteners, Screws and Bolts: Stainless steel or chromium/nickel 
plated brass. 

B. Concealed Fasteners, Screws and Bolts: Hot-dip galvanized (except in 
high moisture areas use stainless steel). 

C. Metal Clips: Anchor curtain tracks to exposed grid of lay-in acoustical 
tile ceilings, with concealed metal (butterfly) type or two piece snap 
locking type ceiling clip of high strength spring steel. When it is not 
possible to install the metal ceiling clip, the cubicle curtain track 
may be screwed to the ceiling grid. 

2.4 FINISHES 

 


A. Aluminum: Finish numbers for aluminum specified are in accordance with 
The Aluminum Association's Designation System. AA-C22A31 finish 
Chemically etched medium matte, with clear anodic coating, Class II 
Architectural, 0.4 mils thick. 

B. Chrome/Nickel Plating: Satin or polished finish as specified, ASTM 
B546, minimum thickness of chromium plate as follows: 

1. 0.2 mil on copper alloys. 

2. 0.4 mil on steel. 

C. Stainless Steel: No. 4 in accordance with NAAMM Metal Finishes Manual. 

2.5 FABRICATION 

A. Weld and grind smooth joints of fabricated components. 

B. Form tracks and bends of lengths that will produce the minimum number 
of joints. Make track sections up to 4800 mm (16 feet) without joints. 
Form corner bend on a 300 mm (12 inch) radius. 

C. Provide steel anchor plates, supports, and anchors for securing 
components to building construction. 

D. Form flat surface without distortion. 

E. Shop assemble components and package complete with anchors and 
fittings. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Install tracks after finish painting and ceiling finishing operations 
are complete. 

B. Install track level and hangers plumb and securely anchor to the 
ceiling to form a rigid installation. 

C. Anchor surface mounted curtain tracks directly to exposed grid of 
lay-in acoustical tile ceilings with suitable fasteners, spaced 
approximately 600 mm (24 inches) on center. 

D. Anchor surface mounted curtain tracks to concrete, plaster and gypsum 
board ceilings with a minimum of 3 mm (1/8-inch) diameter fastenings or 
concealed clips spaced not more than 900 mm (three feet) on center. 

F. Securely fasten end stop caps to prevent their being forced out by the 
striking weight of carriers. 

H. Remove damaged or defective components and replace with new components 
or repair to the original condition. 

3.2 ACCEPTANCE 

A. Track shall be installed neat, rigid, plumb, level and true, and 
securely anchored to the overhead construction. 


B. Carrier units shall operate smoothly and easily over the full range of 
travel. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 10 26 00 
WALL AND DOOR PROTECTION 

. 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies wall guards (crash rails or bumper guards), 
handrail/wall guard combinations, corner guards and door/door frame 
protectors and high impact wall covering. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Structural steel corner guards: Section 05 50 00, METAL FABRICATIONS. 

B. Armor plates and kick plates not specified in this section: Section 08 
71 00, DOOR HARDWARE. 

C. Color and texture of aluminum and resilient material: Section 09 06 00, 
SCHEDULE FOR FINISHES. 

D. Reference Section 101811 SUSTAINABLE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

E. See Drawings Sheet AE103 and AE104 for corner guard, crash rail and 
handrail locations. 

F. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings: Show design and installation details. 

C. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Handrail/Wall Guard Combinations. 

2. Wall Guards. 

3. Corner Guards. 

4. Door/Door Frame Protectors. 

D. Test Report: Showing that resilient material complies with specified 
fire and safety code requirements. 

1.4 DELIVERY AND STORAGE 

A. Deliver materials to the site in original sealed packages or containers 
marked with the name and brand, or trademark of the manufacturer. 

B. Protect from damage from handling and construction operations before, 
during and after installation. 

C. Store in a dry environment of approximately 21° C (70 degrees F) for at 
least 48 hours prior to installation. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in text by basic designation 
only. 


B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-99(R2009)..........Stainless and Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel 
Steel Plate, Sheet, and Strip 

B221-08.................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, 
Wire, Shapes, and Tubes 

D256-06.................Impact Resistance of Plastics 

D635-06.................Rate of Burning and/or Extent and Time of 
Burning of Self-Supporting Plastics in a 
Horizontal Position 

E84-09..................Surface Burning Characteristics of Building 
Materials 

C. The National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM): 

AMP 500-06..............Metal Finishes Manual 

D. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

80-10...................Standard for Fire Doors and Windows 

E. Society of American Automotive Engineers (SAE): 

J 1545-05...............Instrumental Color Difference Measurement for 
Exterior Finishes. 

F. Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL): 

Annual Issue............Building Materials Directory 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

 

2.1 MATERIALS 

C. Resilient Material: 

1. Extruded and injection molded acrylic vinyl or extruded polyvinyl 
chloride meeting following requirements: 

a. Minimum impact resistance of 1197 ps (25 ft lbs per sq.ft) when 
tested in accordance with ASTM D256 (Izod impact, ft.lbs. per inch 
notch). 

b. Class 1 fire rating when tested in accordance with ASTM E84, 
having a maximum flame spread of 25 and a smoke developed rating 
of 450 or less. 

c. Rated self extinguishing when tested in accordance with ASTM D635. 

d. Material shall be labeled and tested by Underwriters Laboratories 
or other approved independent testing laboratory. 

e. Integral color with all colored components matched in accordance 
with SAE J 1545 to within plus or minus 1.0 on the CIE-LCH scales. 

f. Same finish on exposed surfaces. 

2.2 CORNER GUARDS 

A. Resilient, Shock-Absorbing Corner Guards: Surface mounted type of 6 mm 
1/4-inch corner) formed to profile shown. 


1. Snap-on corner guard formed from resilient material, minimum 2 mm 
(0.078-inch) thick, free floating on a continuous 1.6 mm (0.063-inch) 
thick extruded aluminum retainer. Design retainer used for flush 
mounted type to act as a stop for adjacent wall finish material. 
Provide appropriate mounting hardware, cushions and base plates as 
required. 

2. Provide factory fabricated end closure caps at top and bottom of 
surface mounted corner guards. 

3. Flush mounted corner guards installed on any fire rated wall shall 
maintain the fire rating of the wall. Provide fire test of proposed 
corner guard system to verify compliance. 

a. Where insulating materials are an integral part of the corner 
guard system, the insulating materials shall be provided by the 
manufacturer of the corner guard system. 

b. All exposed metal in fire rated assemblies shall have a paintable 
finish. 

B. Stainless Steel Corner Guards: Fabricate of 1.6 mm (0.0625-inch) thick 
stainless steel. Form guards of dimensions and to contour shown. 

2.3 WALL GUARDS AND HANDRAILS 

A. Resilient Wall Guards and Handrails: 

1. Handrail/Wall Guard Combination: Snap-on covers of resilient 
material, minimum 2 mm (0.078-inch) thick, shall be free-floated on a 
continuous, extruded aluminum retainer, minimum 1.8 mm (0.072-inch) 
thick, anchored to wall at maximum 760 mm (30 inches) on center. 

2. Wall Guards (Crash Rails): Snap-on covers of resilient material, 
minimum 2.8 mm (0.110-inch) thick, shall be free-floated over 50 mm 
(two-inch) wide aluminum retainer clips, minimum 2.3 mm (0.090-inch) 
thick, anchored to wall at maximum 600 mm (24 inches) on center, 
supporting a continuous aluminum retainer, minimum 1.6 mm (0.062- 
inch) thick; or, shall be free-floated over a continuous extruded 
aluminum retainer, minimum 2.3 (0.090-inch) thick anchored to wall at 
maximum 600 mm (24 inches) on center. 

3. Provide handrails and wall guards (crash rails) with prefabricated 
and closure caps, inside and outside corners, concealed splices, 
cushions, mounting hardware and other accessories as required. End 
caps and corners shall be field adjustable to assure close alignment 
with handrails and wall guards (crash rails). Screw or bolt closure 
caps to aluminum retainer. 

2.4 DOOR AND DOOR FRAME PROTECTION 

A. Fabricate door and door frame protection items from vinyl acrylic or 
polyvinyl chloride resilient material, minimum 1.5 mm (0.060-inch) 


thick, for doors and 0.9 mm (0.035-inch) thick for door frames, as 
shown. 

B. Coordinate door and door frame protection material requirements with 
door and frame suppliers to insure fit for all components, and color as 
specified. 

C. Provide adhesive as recommended by resilient material manufacturer. 

2.6 FASTENERS AND ANCHORS 

A. Provide fasteners and anchors as required for each specific type of 
installation. 

B. Where type, size, spacing or method of fastening is not shown or 
specified, submit shop drawings showing proposed installation details. 

2.7 FINISH 

A. In accordance with NAAMM AMP 500 series. 

B. Aluminum: 

1. Exposed aluminum: AAC22A31 chemically etched medium matte, with clear 
anodic coating, Class II Architectural, 0.4 mil thick. AA-C22A32 
chemically etched medium matte with integrally colored anodic 
coating, Class II Architectural 0.4 mil thick. 

2. Concealed aluminum: Mill finish as fabricated, uniform in color and 
free from surface blemishes. 

C. Stainless Steel: NAAMM finish Number 4. 

D. Resilient Material: Embossed texture and color in accordance with SAE J 
1545 and as specified in Section 09 06 00, SCHEDULE FOR FINISHES. 

PART 3 - INSTALLATION 

3.1 RESILIENT CORNER GUARDS 

 Install corner guards on walls in accordance with manufacturer's 
instructions. 

B. Where corner guards are installed on walls, partitions or columns 
finished with plaster or ceramic tile, anchor corner guards as shown on 
drawings. Provide continuous 16 gage perforated, galvanized Z-shape 
steel anchors welded to back edges of corner guards and wired to metal 
studs expansion bolted to concrete or masonry with four 9.5 mm 
(3/8-inch) diameter bolts, spaced 400 mm (16 inches) on centers. Coat 
back surfaces of corner guards, where shown, with a non-flammable, sound 
deadening material. Corner guards shall overlap finish plaster surfaces. 

1. Where corner guards are installed on exposed structural glazed facing 
tile units or masonry wall, partitions or columns, anchor corner 
guards with four nominal 1.3 mm (0.0516-inch) thick, adjustable 
galvanized steel anchors, spaced as shown. Grout spaces solid between 
guards and backing with Portland cement and sand mortar. 


2. Where corner guards are installed on gypsum board, clean surface and 
anchor guards with a neoprene solvent-type contact adhesive 
specifically manufactured for use on gypsum board construction. 
Remove excess adhesive from around edge of guard and allow to cure 
undisturbed for 24 hours. 

3.3 RESILIENT HANDRAIL WALL GUARD COMBINATIONS AND RESILIENT WALL GUARDS 
(CRASH RAIL) 

 Secure guards to walls with mounting brackets and fasteners in 
accordance with manufacturer's details and instructions. 

3.4 ALUMINUM WALL GUARDS 

 Secure brackets to walls with fasteners, spaced in accordance with 
manufacturer's installation instructions. 

3.5 STAINLESS STEEL WALL GUARDS 

 Space brackets at not more than three feet on centers and anchor to the 
wall in accordance with manufacturer's installation instructions. 

3.6 DOOR, DOOR FRAME PROTECTION AND HIGH IMPACT WALL COVERING 

A. Surfaces to receive protection shall be clean, smooth and free of 
obstructions. 

B. Install protectors after frames are in place but preceding installation 
of doors in accordance with approved shop drawings and manufacturers 
specific instructions. 

C. Apply with adhesive in controlled environment according to manufacture’s 
recommendations. 

D. Protection installed on fire rated doors and frames shall be installed 
according to NFPA 80 and installation procedures listed in UL Building 
Materials Directory; or, equal listing by other approved independent 
testing laboratory establishing the procedures. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 10 28 00 
TOILET, BATH, AND LAUNDRY ACCESSORIES 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Refer to Toilet Accessory Schedule on Drawings for acquisition and 
installation responsibility. 

B. This section specifies manufactured items usually used in dressing 
rooms, toilets, baths, locker rooms and at sinks in related spaces. 

C. Items Specified: 

1. Paper towel dispenser. 

2. Toilet tissue dispenser. 

3. Grab Bars: 

4. Shower curtain tracks . 

5. Clothes hooks, robe or coat. 

6. Metal framed mirror. 

7. Soap dishes. 

8. Mop racks. 

9. Stainless steel shelves. 

1.2 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings: 

1. Each product specified. 

2. Paper towel dispenser. 

3. Metal framed mirrors, showing shelf where required, fillers, and 
design and installation of units when installed on ceramic tile 
wainscots and offset surfaces. 

4. Shower Curtain tracks, showing required length for each location. 

5. Grab bars, showing design and each different type of anchorage. 

6. Show material and finish, size of members, and details of 
construction, installation and anchorage of mop racks. 

C. Samples: 

1. One of each type of accessory specified. 

2. After approval, samples may be used in the work. 

D. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. All accessories specified. 

2. Show type of material, gages or metal thickness in inches, finishes, 
and when required, capacity of accessories. 

3. Show working operations of spindle for toilet tissue dispensers. 

4. Mop racks. 


E. Manufacturer's Certificates: 

1. Attesting that soap dispensers are fabricated of material that will 
not be affected by liquid soap or aseptic detergents, Phisohex and 
solutions containing hexachlorophene. 

2. Anodized finish as specified. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Each product shall meet, as a minimum, the requirements specified, and 
shall be a standard commercial product of a manufacturer regularly 
presently manufacturing items of type specified. 

B. Each accessory type shall be the same and be made by the same 
manufacturer. 

C. Each accessory shall be assembled to the greatest extent possible before 
delivery to the site. 

D. Include additional features, which are not specifically prohibited by 
this specification, but which are a part of the manufacturer's standard 
commercial product. 

1.4 PACKAGING AND DELIVERY 

A. Pack accessories individually to protect finish. 

B. Deliver accessories to the project only when installation work in rooms 
is ready to receive them. 

C. Deliver inserts and rough-in frames to site at appropriate time for 
building-in. 

D. Deliver products to site in sealed packages of containers; labeled for 
identification with manufacturer's name, brand, and contents. 

1.5 STORAGE 

A. Store products in weathertight and dry storage facility. 

B. Protect from damage from handling, weather and construction operations 
before, during and after installation in accordance with manufacturer's 
instructions. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by the basic 
designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-99(R2009)..........Stainless and Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel 
Steel Plate, Sheet and Strip. 

A176-99(R2009)..........Stainless and Heat-Resisting Chromium Steel 
Plate, Sheet, and Strip 

A269-10.................Seamless and Welded Austenitic Stainless Steel 
Tubing for General Service 


A312/A312M-09...........Seamless and Welded Austenitic Stainless Steel 
Pipes 

A653/A653M-10...........Steel Sheet, Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) or Zinc- 
Iron Alloy-Coated (Galvannealed) by the Hot-Dip 
Process 

B221-08.................Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, 
Wire, Shapes, and Tubes 

B456-03(R2009)..........Electrodeposited Coatings of Copper Plus Nickel 
Plus Chromium and Nickel Plus Chromium 

C1036-06................Flat Glass 

C1048-04................Heat-Treated Flat Glass-Kind HS, Kind FT Coated 
and Uncoated Glass 

D635-10.................Rate of Burning and/or Extent and Time of 
Burning of Self Supporting Plastics in a 
Horizontal Position 

F446-85(R2009)..........Consumer Safety Specification for Grab Bars and 
Accessories Installed in the Bathing Area. 

D3453-07................Flexible Cellular Materials - Urethane for 
Furniture and Automotive Cushioning, Bedding, 
and Similar Applications 

D3690-02(R2009).........Vinyl-Coated and Urethane-Coated Upholstery 
Fabrics 

C. The National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM): 

AMP 500 Series..........Metal Finishes Manual 

D. American Welding Society (AWS): 

D10.4-86 (R2000)........Welding Austenitic Chromium-Nickel Stainless 
Steel Piping and Tubing 

E. Federal Specifications (Fed. Specs.): 

A-A-3002................Mirrors, Glass 

FF-S-107C (2)...........Screw, Tapping and Drive 

FF-S-107C...............Screw, Tapping and Drive. 

WW-P-541E(1)............Plumbing Fixtures (Accessories, Land Use) Detail 
Specification 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. Aluminum: ASTM B221, alloy 6063-T5 and alloy 6463-T5. 

B. Stainless Steel: 

1. Plate or sheet: ASTM A167, Type 302, 304, or 304L, except ASTM A176 
where Type 430 is specified, 0.0299-inch thick unless otherwise 
specified. 

2. Tube: ASTM A269, Alloy Type 302, 304, or 304L. 


C. Stainless Steel Tubing: ASTM A269, Grade 304 or 304L, seamless or 
welded. 

D. Stainless Steel Pipe: ASTM A312; Grade TP 304 or TP 304L. 

E. Steel Sheet: ASTM A653, zinc-coated (galvanized) coating designation 
G90. 

F. Glass: 

1. ASTM C1036, Type 1, Class 1, Quality q2, for mirrors, and for mirror 
doors in medicine cabinets. 

2. ASTM C1036, Type 1 Class 1 Quality q3, for shelves in medicine 
cabinets. 

3. ASTM C1048, Kind FT, Condition A, Type 1, Class 1 (use in Mental 
Health and Behavior Nursing Unit Psychiatric Patient Areas and 
Security Examination Rooms where mirrors and glass are specified). 

G. Foam Rubber: ASTM D3453, Grade BD, Type 2. 

H. Vinyl Covering: ASTM D3690, Vinyl coated fabric, Class A. 

I. Plywood: PS1, Grade CD. 

2.2 FASTENERS 

A. Exposed Fasteners: Stainless steel or chromium plated brass, finish to 
match adjacent surface. 

B. Concealed Fasteners: Steel, hot-dip galvanized (except in high moisture 
areas such as showers or bath tubs use stainless steel). 

C. Toggle Bolts: For use in hollow masonry or frame construction. 

D. Hex bolts: For through bolting on thin panels. 

E. Expansion Shields: Lead or plastic as recommended by accessory 
manufacturer for component and substrate for use in solid masonry or 
concrete. 

F. Screws: 

1. ASME B18.6.4. 

2. Fed Spec. FF-S-107, Stainless steel Type A. 

G. Adhesive: As recommended by manufacturer for products to be joined. 

2.3 FINISH 

A. In accordance with NAAMM AMP 500 series. 

B. AA-M32 Mechanical finish, medium satin. 

1. Chromium Plating: ASTM B456, satin or bright as specified, Service 
Condition No. SC2. 

2. Stainless Steel: NAAMM AMP 503, finish number 4. 

3. Ferrous Metal: 

a. Shop Prime: Clean, pretreat and apply one coat of primer and bake. 

b. Finish: Over primer apply two coats of alkyd or phenolic resin 
enamel, and bake. 


2.4 FABRICATION - GENERAL 

A. Welding, AWS D10.4. 

B. Grind dress, and finish welded joints to match finish of adjacent 
surface. 

C. Form exposed surfaces from one sheet of stock, free of joints. 

D. Provide steel anchors and components required for secure installation. 

E. Form flat surfaces without distortion. Keep exposed surfaces free from 
scratches and dents. Reinforce doors to prevent warp or twist. 

F. Isolate aluminum from dissimilar metals and from contact with building 
materials as required to prevent electrolysis and corrosion. 

G. Hot-dip galvanized steel, except stainless steel, anchors and fastening 
devices. 

H. Shop assemble accessories and package with all components, anchors, 
fittings, fasteners and keys. 

I. Key items alike. 

J. Provide templates and rough-in measurements as required. 

K. Round and deburr edges of sheets to remove sharp edges. 

2.5 PAPER TOWEL DISPENSERS 

A. Semi-Recess Mounting. 

B. Roll dispensing. 

C. Fabricate of stainless steel. 

D. Georgia-Pacific enMotion #59466 battery operation – no exceptions. 

2.6 TOILET TISSUE DISPENSERS 

A. Double roll recess mounted type. 

B. Removable spindle ABS plastic or chrome plated plastic. 

C. Wood rollers are not acceptable. 

2.7 GRAB BARS 

A. Fed. Spec WW-P-541/8B, Type IV, bars, surface mounted, Class 2, grab 
bars and ASTM F446. 

B. Fabricate of either stainless steel or nylon coated steel, except use 
only one type throughout the project: 

1. Stainless steel: Grab bars, flanges, mounting plates, supports, 
screws, bolts, and exposed nuts and washers. 

C. Concealed mount, except grab bars mounted at floor, swing up. 

D. Bars: 

1. Fabricate from 38 mm (1-1/2 inch) outside diameter tubing. 

a. Stainless steel, minimum 1.2 mm (0.0478 inch) thick. 

b. Nylon coated bars, minimum 1.5 mm (0.0598 inch) thick. 

2. Fabricate in one continuous piece with ends turned toward walls, 
except swing up and where grab bars are shown continuous around three 


sides of showers, bars may be fabricated in two sections, with 
concealed slip joint between. 

3. Continuous weld intermediate support to the grab bar. 

4. Swing up bars manually operated. Designed to prevent bar from 
falling when in raised position. 

E. Flange for Concealed Mounting: 

1. Minimum of 2.65 mm (0.1046 inch) thick, approximately 75 mm (3 inch) 
diameter by 13 mm (1/2 inch) deep, with provisions for not less than 
three set screws for securing flange to back plate. 

2. Insert grab bar through center of the flange and continuously weld 
perimeter of grab bar flush to back side of flange. 

F. Back Plates: 

1. Minimum 2.65 mm (0.1046 inch) thick metal. 

2. Fabricate in one piece, approximately 6 mm (1/4 inch) deep, with 
diameter sized to fit flange. Provide slotted holes to accommodate 
anchor bolts. 

2.8 SHOWER CURTAIN TRACKS 

A. Extruded Anodized Aluminum Track: 

1. 29/32" wide x 11/16" tall x .050” wall thickness. 

2. Provide with angle bends, end caps and curtain carriers in quantities 
as required for facility standard curtain hole pattern. 

3. Split track at patient lift rail as shown on drawings. 

2.9 CLOTHES HOOKS-ROBE OR COAT 

A. Fabricate hook units either of chromium plated brass with a satin 
finish, or stainless steel, using 6 mm (1/4 inch) minimum thick stock, 
with edges and corners rounded smooth to the thickness of the metal, or 
3 mm (1/8 inch) minimum radius. 

B. Fabricate each unit as a double hook on a single shaft, integral with or 
permanently fastened to the wall flange, provided with concealed 
fastenings. 

2.10 METAL FRAMED MIRRORS 

A. Fed. Spec. A-A-3002 metal frame; stainless steel, type 302 or 304. 

B. Mirror Glass: 

1. Minimum 6 mm (1/4 inch) thick. 

2. Set mirror in a protective vinyl glazing tape. 

C. Frames: 

1. Channel or angle shaped section with face of frame not less than 9 mm 
(3/8 inch) wide. Fabricate with square corners. 

2. Use either 0.9 mm (0.0359 inch) thick stainless steel, chrome 
finished steel, or extruded aluminum, with clear anodized finish 0.4 
mils thick. 


3. Filler: 

a. Where mirrors are mounted on walls having ceramic tile wainscots 
not flush with wall above, provide fillers at void between back of 
mirror and wall surface. 

b. Fabricate fillers from same material and finish as the mirror 
frame, contoured to conceal the void behind the mirror at sides 
and top. 

D. Back Plate: 

1. Fabricate backplate for concealed wall hanging of either zinc-coated, 
or cadmium plated 0.9 mm (0.036 inch) thick sheet steel, die cut to 
fit face of mirror frame, and furnish with theft resistant concealed 
wall fastenings. 

2. Use set screw type theft resistant concealed fastening system for 
mounting mirrors. 

E. Mounting Bracket: 

1. Designed to support mirror tight to wall. 

2. Designed to retain mirror with concealed set screw fastenings. 

2.11 SOAP DISHES 

A. Fed. Spec. WW-P-541/8B, Type VI, Holder. 

B. Class 2, Recessed with Bar: 

1. One piece seamless shell and flange with provisions for concealed 
fasteners. 

2. Fabricate from either chromium plated brass, or 0.8 mm (0.0329 inch) 
thick stainless steel. 

3. Form surface of soap tray with raised ridges or patterned dimples to 
provide gripping surface for soap bar, or provide flush soap tray 
with a retaining lip. Plastic soap trays or tray inserts are not 
acceptable. 

2.12 MOP RACKS 

A. Minimum 1.0M (40 inches) long with five holders. 

B. Clamps: 

1. Minimum of 1.3 mm (0.050-inch) thick stainless steel bracket 
retaining channel with a hard rubber serrated cam; pivot mounted to 
channel. 

2. Clamps to hold handles from 13 mm (1/2-inch) minimum to 32 mm (1-1/4 
inch) maximum diameter. 

C. Support: 

1. Minimum of 1 mm (0.0375 inch) thick stainless steel hat shape channel 
to hold clamps away from wall as shown. 

2. Drill wall flange for 3 mm (1/8 inch) fasteners above and below clamp 
locations. 


D. Secure clamps to support with oval head machine screws or rivets into 
continuous reinforcing back of clamps. 

E. Finish on stainless Steel: AMP 503-No. 4. 

2.13 STAINLESS STEEL SHELVES 

A. Fabricate shelves and brackets to design shown of 1.2 mm (0.0478-inch) 
thick stainless steel. 

B. Round and finish smooth projecting corners of shelves and edge corners 
of brackets. Drill brackets for 6 mm (1/4-inch) anchor bolts. 

C. Screw or weld brackets to shelves. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 PREPARATION 

A. Before starting work notify Contracting Officer Representative (COR) in 
writing of any conflicts detrimental to installation or operation of 
units. 

B. Verify with the Contracting Officer Representative (COR) the exact 
location of accessories. 

3.2 INSTALLATION 

A. Set work accurately, in alignment and where shown. Items shall be plumb, 
level, free of rack and twist, and set parallel or perpendicular as 
required to line and plane of surface. 

B. Toggle bolt to steel anchorage plates in frame partitions or hollow 
masonry. 

C. Install accessories in accordance with the manufacturer's printed 
instructions and ASTM F446. 

D. Install accessories plumb and level and securely anchor to substrate. 

E. Install accessories in a manner that will permit the accessory to 
function as designed and allow for servicing as required without 
hampering or hindering the performance of other devices. 

F. Position and install dispensers, and other devices in countertops, clear 
of drawers, permitting ample clearance below countertop between devices, 
and ready access for maintenance as needed. 

G. Align mirrors, dispensers and other accessories even and level, when 
installed in battery. 

H. Install accessories to prevent striking by other moving, items or 
interference with accessibility. 

I. Install wall mirrors in Mental Health and Behavioral Units with tamper 
resistant screws that are flush mounted so that they will not support a 
rope or material for hanging. 


3.3 SCHEDULE OF ACCESSORIES 

A. Refer to drawings for toilet accessory group contents, locations, and 
mounting heights. 

3.4 CLEANING 

 After installation, clean as recommended by the manufacturer and protect 
from damage until completion of the project. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 11 73 00 
CEILING MOUNTED PATIENT LIFT SYSTEM 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 Ceiling Mounted Patient Lift Systems for the transfer of physically 
challenged patients are specified in this section. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS: Requirements for pre-test of 
equipment. 

B. Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STRUCTURAL 
COMPONENTS: Seismic requirements for non-structural equipment. 

C. Section 26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS: General 
Electrical Requirements and items, which are common to sections of 
Division 26. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

 Certification for compliance is required for Ceiling Mounted Patient 
Lift Systems. Certifications shall be provided by an independent third 
party who will conduct testing to ensure that the ceiling lift and 
charging system are safe and in compliance with ISO 10535 & UL 60601-1 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with specification Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, 
PRODUCT DATA AND SAMPLES. 

B. Certificates of Compliance 

C. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Lifting Capacity 

2. Lifting Speed 

3. Horizontal Displacement Speeds 

4. Horizontal Axis Motor 

5. Vertical Axis Motor 

6. Emergency Brake 

7. Emergency Lowering Device 

8. Emergency Stopping Device 

9. Electronic Soft-Start and Soft-Stop Motor Control 

10. Current Limiter for Circuit Protection 

11. Low Battery Disconnect System 

12. Strap Length 

13. All equipment anchors and supports. Submittals shall include weights, 
dimensions, center of gravity, standard connections, manufacturer's 
recommendations and behavior problems (e.g., vibration, thermal 



expansion,) associated with equipment or piping so that the proposed 
installation can be properly reviewed. 


D. Individual Room layouts showing location of lift system installation 
shall be approved before proceeding with installation of lifts. 

 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are listed in the text by the basic 
designation only. 

B. International Organization for Standardization (IOS): 

10535-06................Hoist for the Transfer of Disabled Persons- 
Requirements and Test Methods 

C. Underwriters Laboratories (UL): 

60601-1(2003)...........Medical Electrical Equipment: General 
Requirements for Safety 

94-2013.................UL Standards for Safety Test for Flammability of 
Plastic Materials for Parts in Devices and 
Appliances-Fifth Edition 

D. International Electromagnetic Commission (IEC): 

801-2(1991).............Electromagnetic Compatibility for Industrial- 
Process Measurement and Control Equipment-Part 
2: Electromagnetic Discharge Requirements 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 CEILING TRACK SYSTEM 

 The Ceiling Track shall be made from high strength extruded aluminum 
T66081-T5 at a thickness of 3/16” (4.8mm). Provide anchor supports at a 
minimum 3 per linear foot at ceiling substrate. The ceiling track shall 
be finished with baked enamel paint. 

2.2 LIFT UNIT 

A. The Lift Unit shall be constructed of a steel frame system (2205lbs / 
1000kg tested) driven by a gear reduced high torque motor 

B. The Lift system shall have the following features. 

1. Lifting capacity: 440 lbs (200 kg) 

2. Electronic soft-start and soft-stop motor control 

3. Emergency lowering device 

4. Emergency stopping device 

5. Current limiter for circuit protection in case of overload. 

6. Safety device that stops the motor to lift when batteries are low. 

7. Lifting speed: 2.3in/s (6 cm/s), 1.6in/s (3.5cm) in full capacity 

8. Horizontal displacement speed: 5.9in/s (150mm/s) 


9. Horizontal axis motor: 24VDC at 62 watts and vertical axis motor at 
110 watts 

10. Emergency brake (in case of mechanical failure) 

11. Strap length up to 90in (2.3m) tested for 2998lbs (1360kg) 

12. Cab: VO plastic–fire retardant, UL 94 

13. Wireless remote control (optional) 

2.3 MOTORS 

A. Vertical Movement-DC Motor 

1. Type: Class A, fully enclosed, permanent magnet. 

2. Rating: 24Vdc, 1.1A, 110W, 4000RPM, 0.3N-m. 

3. Mounting: Secured to chassis. 

B. Horizontal Movement-DC Motor 

1. Type: Fully enclosed, permanent magnet, integral reducer. 

2. Rating: 24Vdc, 1.8A, 62W, 260RPM, 1.0N-m. 

3. Mounting: Secured to chassis. 

2.4 BATTERIES 

A. The life cycle (number of charging cycles) for batteries shall be in 
compliance with IEC 801-2. 

B. Provide rechargeable batteries with up to 120 transfers with a load of 
200lbs (74kg) and up to 70 transfers with its maximum load of 440lbs 
(200kg). 

2.5 CHARGER 

A. Charger Input: 100-240 Vac, 50/60 Hz. 

B. Charger Output: 27 Vdc, 1 A max. 

C. Supplemental to the charger provide a clip on charging station with 
indicator lights. 

2.6 STRAPS AND SLING 

A. The straps shall be made of threaded nylon. The straps shall ensure the 
patient’s safety by preventing the patient from falling out of the 
sling. 

B. The sling shall be made from a polyester/nylon net material that is 
pliable, breathable and easy to use. The sling shall cradle the body of 
the patient. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Install ceiling mounted patient lift system as per manufacturer's 
instruction and under the supervision of manufacturer's qualified 
representative and as shown on drawings. 


B. If the distance in between the suspended ceiling and anchors is more 
than 18” consult with manufacturer to determine if lateral braces will 
be required. 

3.2 INSTRUCTION AND PERSONNEL TRAINING 

 Training shall be provided for the required personnel to educate them on 
proper operation and maintenance for the lift system equipment. 

3.3 TEST 

 Conduct performance test, in the presence of the Contracting Officer 
Representative (COR) and a manufacturer's field representative, to show 
that the patient lift system equipment and control devices operate 
properly and in accordance with design and specification requirements. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 12 24 00 
WINDOW SHADES 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Woven fabric shades and venetian blinds are specified in this section. 
Window shades shall be furnished complete, including brackets, fittings 
and hardware. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Color of shade woven fabric and color of exposed parts of venetian 
blinds, (including tapes and cords): 

B. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 QUALITY CONTROL 

A. Manufacturer's Qualification: Venetian blind manufacturer shall provide 
evidence that the manufacture of blinds are a major product, and that 
the blinds have performed satisfactorily on similar installations. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Samples: 

1. Shade woven fabric, each type, 600 mm (24 inch) square, including 
cord and ring, showing color, finish and texture. 

2. Venetian blind slats, 300 mm (12 inches) long, including cord and 
tape, showing color and finish. 

C. Manufacturer's literature and data; showing details of construction and 
hardware for: 

 Woven fabric and window shades 

 Venetian blinds 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced to in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. Federal Specifications (Fed. Spec.): 

AA-V-00200B.............Venetian Blinds, Shade, Roller, Window, Roller, 
Slat, Cord, and Accessories 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-99 (R2004).........Stainless and heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel 
Steel Plate, Sheet and Strip 

B221/B221M-07...........Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, Wire, 
Shapes, and Tubes 


D635-06.................Rate of Burning and/or Extent and Time of 
Burning of Self-Supporting Plastics in a 
Horizontal Position 

D648-07.................Deflection Temperature of Plastics Under 
Flexural Load in the Edgewise Position 

D1784 Rev.A-06..........Rigid Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Compounds and 
Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) 
Compounds 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. Shade Woven fabric: translucent. 

B. Staples (For Woven fabric Window Shades): Nonferrous metal or 
zinc-coated steel. 

C. Stainless Steel: ASTM A167 

D. Cords for Venetian Blinds: No. 4 braided nylon having not less than 175 
pounds breaking strength. 

E. Extruded Aluminum: ASTM B221/B221M. 

2.2 VENETIAN BLINDS 

A. Fed. Spec. AA-V-00200, Type II, 25 mm (one inch slats) fabricated of 
aluminum. Pre-production sample is not required. 

2.3 FASTENINGS 

A. Zinc-coated or cadmium plated metal, aluminum or stainless steel 
fastenings of proper length and type. Except as otherwise specified, 
fastenings for use with various structural materials shall be as 
follows: 

Type of Fastening 

Structural Material 

Wood screw 

Wood 

Tap screw 

Metal 

Case-hardened, selftapping 
screw 

Sheet Metal 

Screw or bolt in 
expansion shields 

Solid masonry 

Toggle bolts 

Hollow blocks, 
wallboard and plaster 



 

2.4 FABRICATION 

A. Fabricate woven fabric shades and venetian blinds vertical blinds to fit 
measurements of finished openings obtained at site. 

B. Woven fabric Window Shades: Rolling type, constructed of shade woven 
fabric mounted on rollers. Shade woven fabric shall have plain sides, 
and with hem at bottom to accommodate wood slat. Separate shades are 


required for each individual sash within opening. Length of shades shall 
exceed height of window approximately 300 mm (12 inches) measured from 
head to sill, in addition to material required to make-up hem: 

1. Provide rollers with spindles, nylon bearings, tempered steel 
springs, and all other related accessories required for positive 
action. Provide rollers of diameter recommended by shade 
manufacturer. Staple shade woven fabric to wood rollers to prevent 
wrinkling or folding, and on line parallel to axis of rollers so that 
shade will hang plumb. Space staples not over 90 mm (3-1/2 inches) on 
centers. Use of tacks is prohibited. 

2. Wood slats shall be smooth, tapered, and inserted in the bottom hem 
of the shade woven fabric. 

3. Provide continuous loop metal bead cord to raise and lower woven 
shade. 

C. Venetian Blinds: Venetian blinds shall have 25 mm (one inch) width 
horizontal slats positioned within ladder tapes. Multiple blinds in 
openings are to be of same type and divided at mullions. 

1. Head-rails shall fully enclose operating mechanism on three sides and 
ends. 

2. Bottom rails shall be fully enclosed to prevent contact of tapes and 
sill at underside. 

4. Finish concealed metal work of head-rails including concealed 
mechanism, with one shop coat of paint. Do not paint parts that have 
non-rusting finish, or parts where motion of friction occurs. 

5. Provide plastic wand for control of slat tilting. Wand must extend to 
5’-0” a.f.f. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Woven fabric Window Shades: Mount window shades inside window opening. 
Provide extension face brackets where necessary at mullions. 

1. Locate rollers in level position as high as practicable at heads of 
windows to prevent infiltration of light over rollers. 

2. Where extension brackets are necessary, on mullions or elsewhere, for 
alignment of shades, provide metal lugs, and rigidly anchor lugs and 
brackets. 

3. Place brackets and rollers so that shades will not interfere with 
window and screen hardware. 

4. Shade installation methods not specifically described, are subject to 
approval of Contracting Officer Representative (COR). 

B. Venetian Blinds: Support blinds in level position by brackets and 
intermediate supports that will permit easy removal and replacement of 


units without damage to blind or adjacent surfaces. Provide at least two 
fasteners for each bracket or other support. 

1. Install blinds between jambs on window openings with steel trim. 
Mount brackets on trim reveal, flush with face of trim and secure 
with steel screws. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 12 32 00 
MANUFACTURED WOOD CASEWORK 

. 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies plastic laminate casework as detailed on the 
drawings, including related components and accessories required to form 
integral units. Wood casework items shown on the drawings, but not 
specified below shall be included as part of the work under this 
section, and applicable portions of the specification shall apply to 
these items. Each like item of casework shall be of the same design and 
by one manufacturer. 

 

B. Where shown, provide plastic laminate casework items as follows: 

1. See Architectural Drawings, AE500 Series 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Custom Casework: Section 06 20 00, FINISH CARPENTRY. 

B. Color and Finish of Plastic Laminate: Section 09 06 00, SCHEDULE FOR 
FINISHES. 

C. Lavatories and Plumbing in Casework: Section 22 40 00, PLUMBING 
FIXTURES. 

D. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 MANUFACTURER'S QUALIFICATIONS 

 The fabrication of casework shall be by a manufacturer who produces 
casework similar to the casework specified and shown. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section `01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

Sinks, trim and fittings. 

Locks for doors and drawers 

Adhesive cements 

C. Samples: 

Counter top, plastic laminate, 150 mm (six inch) square 

D. Shop Drawings (1/2 full size): 

1. All casework, showing details of construction, including materials, 
hardware and accessories. 

2. Cabinets and counters showing faucets in connection with sink bowls, 
and electrical fixtures and receptacles which are mounted on cabinets 
and counters. 


3. Fastenings and method of installation. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by basic 
designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-99 (R2009).........Stainless and Heat-Resisting chromium-Nickel 
Steel Plate, Sheet and Strip 

A1008-10................Steel, Sheet, Cold-Rolled, Carbon, Structural, 
High Strength Low Alloy 

C1036-06................Flat Glass 

C. Composite Panel Association (CPA): 

A208.1-09...............Particleboard 

D. U.S. Department of Commerce Product Standards (Prod. Std): 

PS1-95..................Construction and Industrial Plywood 

E. Hardwood, Plywood and Veneer Association (HPVA): 

HP-1-09.................Hardwood and Decorative Plywood 

F. Architectural Woodwork Institute (AWI): 

Architectural Woodwork Quality Standards, Guide Specifications Quality 
Certification Program - 1999 

G. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

A112.18.1-05............Plumbing Fixture Fittings 

H. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA): 

LD3-05..................High Pressure Decorative Laminates 

LD3.1-95................Performance, Application Fabrication and 
Installations of High-Pressure Decorative 
Laminates 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

 

2.2 PLASTIC LAMINATE: 

A. NEMA LD-3. 

B. Exposed decorative surfaces including countertops, both sides of cabinet 
doors, and for items having plastic laminate finish. General purpose 
Type HGL. 

C. Cabinet Interiors Including Shelving: Both of following options to 
comply with NEMA, LD3.1 as a minimum. 

1. Plastic laminate clad plywood or particle board. 

D. Backing sheet on bottom of plastic laminate covered wood tops. Backer 
Type BKL. 

E. Post Forming Fabrication, Decorative Surface: Post forming Type HGP. 


2.3 PLYWOOD, SOFTWOOD 

 Prod. Std. PS1, five ply construction from 13 mm to 28 mm (1/2 inch to 
1-1/8 inch) thickness, and seven ply for 31 mm (1 1/4 inch) thickness. 

2.4 PARTICLEBOARD 

 CPA A208.1, Type 1, Grade 1-M-3. 

2.5 RUBBER OR VINYL BASE 

 cove (for resilient floor); 100 mm (4 inch) high, 3 mm (1/8 inch) thick, 
flexible to conform to irregularities in walls, partitions and floors. 
See plans for integral sheet flooring base installation requirements. 

2.6 PLUMBING FIXTURES 

 ASME A112.18.1, except die-cast zinc-alloy material is not acceptable. 

2.11 HARDWARE 

A. Where pin tumbler locks are specified, disc tumbler lock "Duo A", with 
brass working parts and case, as manufactured by the Illinois Lock 
Company will be an acceptable substitute. Locks for each type casework, 
shall be keyed differently and shall be master-keyed for each type 
service, such as Nurses, Psychiatric, and Administration. Provide two 
keys for each lock. Exposed hardware, except as otherwise specified, 
shall be satin finished chromium plated brass or nickel plated brass. 

B. Marking of Locks and Keys: 

1. The name of the manufacturer, or trademark by which manufacturer can 
readily be identified, legibly marked on each lock. 

2. The key change number marked on the exposed face of lock, and also 
stamped on each key. 

3. Key change numbers shall provide sufficient information for 
replacement of the key by the manufacturer. 

C. Hinged Doors: 

1. Doors 900 mm (36 inches) and more in height shall have three hinges 
and doors less than 900 mm (36 inches) in height shall have two 
hinges. Each door shall close against two rubber bumpers. 

2. Hinges: Fabricate hinges with minimum 2 mm (0.072 inch) thick 
chromium plated steel leaves, and with minimum 3.5 mm (0.139 inch) 
diameter stainless steel pin. Hinges shall be five knuckle design 
with 63 mm (2-1/2 inch) high leaves and hospital type tips. 

3. Fasteners: Provide full thread wood screws to fasten hinge leaves to 
door and cabinet frame. Finish screws to match finish of hinges. 

D. Door Catches: 

1. Friction or Magnetic type, fabricated with metal housing. 

2. Provide one catch for cabinet doors 1200 mm (48 inches) high and 
under, and two for doors over 1200 mm (48 inches) high. 


E. Locks: 

1. Cylinder type pin tumbler. 

2. Equip doors and drawers where shown with locks. 

F. Drawer and Door Pulls: 

 Doors and drawers shall have flush pulls, fabricated of either chromium 
plated brass, chromium plated steel, stainless steel, or anodized 
aluminum. 

G. Drawer Slides: 

1. Full extension steel slides with nylon ball-bearing rollers. 

2. Slides shall have positive stop. 

3. Equip drawers with rubber bumpers. 

H. Sliding Doors: 

1. Each door shall be supported by two ball bearing bronze or nylon 
rollers, or sheaves riding on a stainless steel track at top or 
bottom, and shall be restrained by a nylon or stainless steel guide 
at the opposite end. 

2. Plastic guides are not acceptable. 

3. Each door shall have rubber silencers set near top and bottom of each 
jamb. 

I. Shelf Standards (Except For Fixed Shelves): 

 Bright zinc-plated steel for recessed mounting with screws, 16 mm (5/8 
inch) wide by 5 mm (3/16 inch) high providing 13 mm (1/2 inch) 
adjustment, complete with shelf supports. 

K. Hinged Gates: 

 Gates shall have two double-acting hinges, size as required. 

 

2.12 FABRICATION 

A. Casework shall be of the flush overlay design and, except as otherwise 
specified, be of premium grade construction and of component thickness 
in conformance with AWI Quality Standards. 

B. Fabricate casework of plastic laminated covered plywood or 
particleboard as follows: 

1. Where shown, gates doors drawers shelves all semi-concealed 
surfaces shall be plastic laminated. 

2. Horizontal and vertical reveals between doors and drawer for reveal 
overlay design shall be 19 mm (3/4 inch) unless otherwise shown. 

C. Electrical fixtures, receptacles, wiring and junction boxes required for 
fixtures and receptacles: 

1. Factory installed in casework. 

2. For electrical lighting fixtures, see drawings. 


3. For electric receptacles and lighting fixtures installed below or 
adjacent to wall cabinets or above counter tops, see electrical 
sections or specifications. 

4. Install wiring in built-in raceways and terminate at junction box 
mounted on rear of cabinet and counter. 

5. For final hook-up at junction box see electrical sections of 
specifications. 

E. Base: 

1. Provide rubber or vinyl base with close, flush joints; set with 
adhesive unless noted as integral base sheet flooring. 

2. Remove adhesive from exposed surfaces. 

3. Install base at floor line after casework has been accurately 
leveled. 

4. Rub base to glossy finish. 

F. Countertops: 

1. Countertops, splashbacks and reagent type shelves shall be plastic 
laminate factory glued to either a plywood (PS1), or particleboard 
(CPA A208.1) core. 

2. Countertops shall be 3/4 inch thick. 

3. Splashbacks and reagent type shelves shall be finished 19 mm (3/4 
inch) thick and be secured to countertops with concealed metal 
fastenings and with contact surfaces set in waterproof adhesive. 

4. Provide cut-outs for plumbing trim where shown. 

5. Cover exposed edges of countertops, splashbacks and reagent type 
shelves with plastic. 

G. Sink bowls: 

1. 18 gage stainless steel, of size and design shown. 

2. All interior corners of bowls shall be formed to manufacturer's 
standard radii. 

3. Sinks shall have rims with flanged edges overlapping tops to provide 
tight joints. 

4. Secure sink bowls with concealed fastenings. 

5. For service lines from service fixtures, see other sections of 
specifications. 

H. Provide the following plumbing trim and fittings: 

1. Faucets: ASME A112.18.1 Type I, compression type, countertop mounted, 
chromium plated brass, having two valves and with gooseneck spout as 
shown, elevated to clear handles. 

2. Fittings shall have an elongated escutcheon for spout and handles, 
replaceable valve seats and four arm or lever style indexed chromium 


plated brass or stainless steel handles; handles either with or 
without hood. 

I. Faucets: 

1. ASME A112.18.1 Type I, compression type, splashback mounted, chromium 
plated brass, having two valves and with swing-spout and gooseneck 
spout as indicated. 

2. Fittings shall have exposed body union inlets and adjustable flanges. 

3. Valves shall have indexed chromium plated brass or stainless steel 
lever handles and replaceable valves seats; handles either with or 
without hood. 

J. Drain: 

1. Cast or wrought brass or stainless steel with flat strainer. 

2. Surfaces of drains exposed from above shall have a chromium plated 
finish. 

K. Traps: Cast brass. 

M. Support Members for Tops of Tables: 

1. Construct as detailed. 

2. Provide miscellaneous steel members and anchor as shown. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Set casework in place; level, plumb and accurately scribe and secure to 
walls, and/or floors. 

B. The installation shall be complete including all trim and hardware. 
Leave the casework clean and free from defects. 

3.2 FASTENINGS 

A. Fastenings for securing casework to adjoining construction shall be as 
detailed on the drawings or approved shop drawings. 

B. See Section 05 50 00, METAL FABRICATIONS for reinforcement of walls and 
partitions for casework anchorage. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 12 36 00 
COUNTERTOPS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies the following horizontal and trim solid surface 
product types. Solid Surface is defined as nonporous, homogeneous 
material maintaining the same composition throughout the part with a 
composition of acrylic polymer, aluminum trihydrate filler and pigment. 

 1. Countertops with sinks 

 2. Laboratory countertops 

 3. Reception area/nurses stations 

 4. Windowsills 

 5. Cove Backsplashes 

 B. Integral accessories include: 

1. Sinks with traps and drains. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Color and patterns of solid surface: SECTION 09 06 00, SCHEDULE FOR 
FINISHES. 

B. DIVISION 22, PLUMBING. 

C. DIVISION 26, ELECTRICAL. 

D. Equipment Reference Manual for SECTION 12 36 00, COUNTERTOPS. 

E. Section 08 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with SECTION 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings 

1. Show dimensions of section and method of assembly. 

2. Show details of construction at 1/2 scale. 

C. Samples: 

1. 51mm x 51mm (2 inch) square samples each top. 

2. Front edge, back splash, end splash and core with surface material 
and booking. 

1.4 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by the basic 
designation only. 

B. American Hardboard Association (AHA): 

A135.4-95...............Basic Hardboard 

C. Composite Panel Association (CPA): 

A208.1-09...............Particleboard 


D. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

A112.18.1-12............Plumbing Supply Fittings 

A112.1.2-12.............Air Gaps in Plumbing System 

A112.19.3-08(R2004).....Stainless Steel Plumbing Fixtures (Designed for 
Residential Use) 

E. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-99 (R2009).........Stainless and Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel 
Steel Plate, Sheet and Strip 

A1008-10................Steel, Sheet, Cold-Rolled, Carbon, Structural, 
High Strength, Low Alloy 

D256-10.................Pendulum Impact Resistance of Plastic 

D570-98(R2005)..........Water Absorption of Plastics 

D638-10.................Tensile Properties of Plastics 

D785-08.................Rockwell Hardness of Plastics and Electrical 
Insulating Materials 

D790-10.................Flexural Properties of Unreinforced and 
Reinforced Plastics and Electrical Insulating 
Materials 

D4690-99(2005)..........Urea-Formaldehyde Resin Adhesives 

F. Federal Specifications (FS): 

A-A-1936................Adhesive, Contact, Neoprene Rubber 

G. U.S. Department of Commerce, Product Standards (PS): 

PS 1-95.................Construction and Industrial Plywood 

H. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA): 

LD 3-05.................High Pressure Decorative Laminates 

 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. Plastic Laminate: NEMA LD 3. 

1. Concealed backing sheet Type BKL. 

2. Decorative surfaces: 

a. Flat components: Type GP-HGL. 

b. Post forming: Type PF-HGP. 

3. Chemical Resistant Surfaces 

a. Flat components: Type GP-HGL. 

b. Post forming: Type PF-HGP. 

c. Resistance to reagents: 

1) Test with five 0.25 mil drops remaining on surface for 16 hours 
followed by washing off with tap water, then cleaned with 
liquid soap and water, dried with soft cotton cloth and then 
cleaned with naphtha. 


2) No change in color, surface texture, and original 
protectability remaining from test results of following 
reagents: 

98% Acetic Acid 

Butyl Alcohol 

Acetone 

90% Formic Acid-- 

Benzine 

Chloroform 

28% Ammonium Hydroxide 

Xylene 

Carbon 
Tetrachloride 

Zinc Chloride (Sat.) 

Toluene 

Cresol 

Sodium Carbonate (Sat.) 

Gasoline 

Ether 

Calcium Hypochlorite 
(Sat.) 

Kerosene 

Cottonseed Oil 

Sodium Chloride (Sat.) 

Mineral Oil 

40% Formaldehyde 

Methyl Alcohol 

Ethyl Acetate 

Trichlorethylene 

Ethyl Alcohol 

Amyl Acetate 

Monochlorobenzine 



 

3) Superficial effects only: Slight color change, spot, or residue 
only with original protectability remaining from test results 
of following reagents: 

77% Sulfuric Acid 

37% Hydrochloric Acid 

85% Phenol 

33% Sulfuric Acid 

20% Nitric Acid 

Furfural 

85% Phosphoric Acid 

30% Nitric Acid 

Dioxane 



 

4) Minimum height of impact resistance: 300 mm (12 inches). 

B. Molded Resin: 

1. Non-glare epoxy resin or furan resin compounded and cured for minimum 
physical properties specified: 

Flexural strength 

70 MPa (10,000 psi) 

ASTM D790 

Rockwell hardness 

105 

ASTM D785 

Water absorption, 14 
hours (weight) 

.01% 

ASTM D570 



 

2. Material of uniform mixture throughout. 

I. Adhesive 

1. For plastic laminate FS A-A-1936. 

2. For wood products: ASTM D4690, unextended urea resin or unextended 
melamine resin, phenol resin, or resorcinol resin. 

3. For Field Joints: 

a. Epoxy type, resistant to chemicals as specified for plastic 
laminate laboratory surfaces. 

b. Fungi resistant: ASTM G-21, rating of 0. 

J. Fasteners: 


1. Metals used for welding same metal as materials joined. 

2. Use studs, bolts, spaces, threaded rods with nuts or screws suitable 
for materials being joined with metal splice plates, channels or 
other supporting shape. 

K. Solid Polymer Material: 

1. Filled Methyl Methacrylic Polymer. 

2. Performance properties required: 

Property 

Result 

Test 

Elongation 

0.3% min. 

ASTM D638 

Hardness 

90 Rockwell M 

ASTM D785 

Gloss (600 Gordon) 

5-20 

NEMA LD3.1 

Color stability 

No change 

NEMA LD3 except 200 
hour 

Abrasion 
resistance 

No loss of pattern 
Max wear depth 0.0762 mm 
(0.003 in) - 10000 cycles 

NEMA LD3 

Water absorption 
weight (5 max) 

24 hours 0.9 

ASTM D-570 

Izod impact 

14 N·m/m 
(0.25 ft-lb/in) 

ASTM D256 
(Method A) 

Impact resistance 

No fracture 

NEMA LD-3 900 mm 
(36") drop 1 kg 
(2 lb.) ball 

Boiling water 
surface resistance 

No visible change 

NEMA LD3 

High temperature 
resistance 

Slight surface dulling 

NEMA LD3 



 

3. Cast into sheet form and bowl form. 

4. Color throughout with subtle veining through thickness. 

5. Joint adhesive and sealer: Manufacturers silicone adhesive and 
sealant for joining methyl methacrylic polymer sheet. 

6. Bio-based products will be preferred. 

L. Laminar Flow Control Device 

1. Smooth bright stainless steel or satin finish, chrome plated metal 
laminar flow device shall provide non-aeration, clear, coherent 
laminar flow that will not splash in basin. Device shall also have a 
flow control restrictor and have vandal resistant housing. 

2. Flow Control Restrictor: 

a. Capable of restricting flow of 7.5 to 8.5 Lpm (2.0 to 2.2 gpm) for 
sinks provided in paragraph 2.2D. 


b. Compensates for pressure fluctuation maintaining flow rate 
specified above within 10 percent between 175 and 550 kPa (25 and 
80 psi). 

c. Operates by expansion and contraction, eliminates mineral/sediment 
building up with self clearing action, and is capable of easy 
manual cleaning. 

2.2 SINKS 

A. Molded Resin: 

1. Cast or molded in one piece with interior corners 25 mm (one inch) 
minimum radius. 

2. Minimum thickness of sides and ends 13 mm (1/2 inch), bottom 16 mm 
(5/8 inch). 

3. Molded resin outlet for drain and standpipe overflow. 

4. Provide clamping collar permitting connection to 38 mm (1-1/2 inch) 
or 50 mm (2 inch) waste outlet and trap, making sealed but not 
permanent connection. 

B. Stainless Steel: 

1. ANSI/ASME A112.19.3, Type 304. 

2. Self rim for plastic laminate or similar tops with concealed 
fasteners. 

3. Flat rim for welded into stainless steel tops. 

4. Ledge back or ledge sides with holes to receive required fixtures 
when mounted on countertop. 

5. Apply fire resistant sound deadening material to underside. 

C. Stainless steel circular or oval shaped bowl. 

D. Sinks of Methyl Methacrylic Polymer: 

1. Minimum 19 mm (3/4 inch) thick, cast into bowl shape with overflow to 
drain. 

2. Provide for underhung installation to countertop. 

3. Provide openings for drain. 

2.3 TRAPS AND FITTINGS 

A. Material as specified in DIVISION 22, PLUMBING. 

B. For Molded Resin Sinks: 

1. Chemical resisting P-traps and fittings for chemical waste service. 

2. Provide traps with cleanout plug easily removable without tools. 

C. For Stainless Steel Sinks: 

1. Either cast or wrought brass or stainless steel P-traps and drain 
fittings; ASME A112.18.1 

2. Flat strainer, except where cup strainer or overflow standpipe 
specified. 

a. Provide cup strainer in cabinet type 1B. 


b. Provide stainless steel overflow stand pipe to within 38 mm (1-1/2 
inches) of sink rim. 

3. Exposed surface chromium plated finish. 

D. Plaster traps: 

1. Cast iron body with porcelain enamel exterior finish. 

2. 50 mm (2 inch) female threaded side inlet and outlet. 

3. Removable galvanized cage having integral baffles and replaceable 
brass screens. 

4. Removable gasketed cover. 

5. Minimum overall dimensions: 350 x 350 x 400 mm high (14 x 14 x 16 
inches) with 175 mm (7 inch) water seal. 

6. Non-siphoning and easily accessible for cleaning. 

E. Air Gap Fittings: ASME A112.1.2. 

F. Methyl Methacrylic Polymer Sink Traps: 

1. Cast or wrought brass with flat grid strainer, off-set tail piece, 
adjustable 38 x 32 mm (1-1/2 x 1 1/4-inch) P trap. 

2. Chromium plated finish. 

2.4 WATER FAUCETS 

A. ASME A112.18.1. 

1. Cast or forged brass, compression type with replaceable seat and stem 
assembly or replaceable cartridge. 

2. Indexed lever handles either with or without head. 

3. Gooseneck minimum clearance above countertop of 190 mm (7-1/2 
inches), bent 180 degrees for vertical discharge. 

4. Swing spouts elevated to clear handles. 

5. Exposed brass surfaces chromium plated. 

6. Cast combination hot and cold fixture with one piece body for 
multiple outlets. 

7. Adapter type connection which will permit field conversion of swing 
spouts to fixed or gooseneck grouts or vice versa. 

8. Pedestals Top for Laboratory or Pharmacy: 

a. Modern design tapered to a round base, factory assembled and 
tested. 

b. Brass shanks, locknuts and washers for attaching to top or curbs. 

B. Laminar flow control device on spouts. 

C. Automatic Controlled Faucets. 

1. Infra-red photocell sensor and a solenoid valve to control water flow 
automatically. 

2. Breaking light beam activates water flow. 

3. Water stops when user moves away from light beam. 

C. Laboratory and Pharmacy Faucets: 


1. Female 9 mm (3/8 inch) IPS threaded outlet for attachment of filter 
pumps, hose connectors, anti-hose nozzle, or laminar flow control 
device on spout end. 

2. Provide angle type vacuum breaker for fixture, designed for low flow, 
with built-in floating disk and renewable seat in vacuum breaker 
body. 

D. Distilled Deionized Water Fixture: 

1. Deck mounted. 

2. Gooseneck spout with handle arranged for self closing and with hold 
open feature to open and close an inert silicone diaphragm valve. 

3. Faucet designed to be chemically insert and resistant to leaching of 
inorganic contaminates, enhancement of bacteria growth, and internal 
corrosion. 

E. Eye and Face Wash Unit Pull-Out-Type: 

1. Deck mounted. 

2. Designed for vandal resistant push-down control valve and 6 foot 
hose. 

3. Eye and face wash head, provide a soft stream for flushing action. 

4. Valve, when opened; remain open until manually closed. 

F. Eye and Face Bath, Counter Mounted: 

1. Stainless Steel circular or oval shaped self rimmed sink, as shown on 
drawings. 

2. Two fully enclosed rubber bound spray heads to provide an aerated 
flow of water simultaneously into both eyes and across face. 

3. Push-pull hand operated valve. 

4. Volume regulator for each spray. 

G. Manifold, Tube-Washing: 

1. Deck mounted 

2. Three valved outlet, plus one bleeder outlet. 

3. Vacuum breaker, and loose key stops with integral check valve. 

H. Vanity or Lavatory Faucets in Methyl Methacrylic Polymer tops: 

1. Extra long center set single lever handle control. 

2. Cast or wrought copper alloy, vandal resistant. 

3. Stainless steel ball type with replaceable non-metallic seats, 
stainless steel lined sockets. 

4. Handle always returning to the neutral position or cartridge body 
construction. 

5. Provide laminar flow control device. 

2.6 FIXTURE IDENTIFICATION 

A. Code fixtures with full view plastic index buttons. 


B. Use following colors and codes: 

SERVICE 

COLOR 

CODE 

COLOR OF LETTERS 

Cold Water 

Dark Green 

CW 

White 

Hot Water 

Red 

HW 

White 

Laboratory Air 

Orange 

AIR 

Black 

Fuel Gas 

Dark Blue 

GAS 

White 

Laboratory Vacuum 

Yellow 

VAC 

Black 

Distilled Water 

White 

DW 

Black 

Deionized Water 

White 

DI 

Black 

Oxygen 

Light Green 

OXY 

White 

Hydrogen 

Pink 

H 

Black 

Nitrogen 

Gray 

N 

Black 

All Other Gases 

Light Blue 

CHEM.SYM. 

Black 



 

2.7 ELECTRICAL RECEPTACLES 

A. Hospital grade per electrical specifications. 

B. Curb Mounted Receptacles: 

1. NEMA 5-20R duplex in galvanized steel box. 

2. Chromium plated brass or steel face plate. 

C. Pedestal Mounted Receptacles: 

1. NEMA 5-20R duplex installed in double faces. 

2. Polished stainless steel or aluminum, or chromium plated brass 
pedestal. 

2.9 FILM VIEWER 

A. Designed for flush mounting in countertop. 

B. Translucent or opalescent panel 400 mm by 500 mm (16 inch by 20 inch). 

C. Minimum of three 15 watt or two 20 watt fluorescent tubes in UL listed 
enclosure. 

D. Provide "on-off" switch for fluorescent tube for front panel of cabinet. 

2.10 COUNTERTOPS 

A. Fabricate in largest sections practicable. 

B. Fabricate with joints flush on top surface. 

C. Fabricate countertops to overhang front of cabinets and end of 
assemblies 25 mm (one inch) except where against walls or cabinets. 

D. Provide 1 mm (0.039 inch) thick metal plate connectors or fastening 
devices (except epoxy resin tops). 

E. Join edges in a chemical resistant waterproof cement or epoxy cement, 
except weld metal tops. 

F. Fabricate with end splashes where against walls or cabinets. 


G. Splash Backs and End Splashes: 

1. Not less than 19 mm (3/4 inch) thick. 

2. Height 100 mm (4 inches) unless noted otherwise. 

3. Laboratories and pharmacy heights or where fixtures or outlets occur: 
Not less than 150 mm (6 inches) unless noted otherwise. 

4. Fabricate epoxy splash back in maximum lengths practical of the same 
material. 

H. Drill or cutout for sinks, and penetrations. 

1. Accurately cut for size of penetration. 

2. Cutout for VL 81 photographic enlarger cabinet. 

a. Finish cutout to fit flush with vertical side of cabinet, allowing 
adjustable shelf to fit into cutout space of cabinet at counter 
top level. Finish cutout surface as an exposed edge. 

b. Provide braces under enlarger space to support not less than 45 kg 
(100 pounds) centered on opening side along backsplash. 

I. Plastic Laminate Countertops: 

1. Fabricate plastic laminate on five-ply plywood or particleboard core 
19 mm (3/4 inch) thick with plastic laminate backing sheet. 

2. Front edge over cabinets not less than 38 mm (1-1/2 inches) thick 
except where plastic "T" insert is used, not less than 19 mm (3/4 
inch) thick. 

3. Exposed Surface and edges of decorative laminated plastic or 
laboratory chemical resistant surface. 

a. Use chemical resistant surface on tops 6A, 6B, and 6C. 

b. Use decorative surface tops when noted plastic laminate, for tops 
10A, 10B and 10C. 

J. Metal Counter Tops: 

1. Fabricate up to 3600 mm (12 feet) long in one piece, including 
nosing, backs and ends. 

2. When counter tops exceed 3600 mm (12 feet) in length accurately 
fitted field joints are acceptable. 

3. Finish thickness at edges 32 mm (1-1/4 inch). 

4. Reinforced with minimum 1.5 mm (0.0598 inch) thick hat channel 
stiffeners, minimum of two stiffeners for units without sinks and 
three stiffeners for units with sinks welded or soldered to underside 
of top full length, except at sink openings. 

5. Apply sound deadening material on underside. 

6. Flange edges of tops down 32 mm (1-1/4 inch) and reinforce with 
concealed hardwood or with a steel frame. 

7. Grind welds smooth and finished on exposed surfaces to match finish 
specified. 


8. Stainless Steel Counter or Sink Tops: 

a. Where noted stainless steel except where specified for nourishment 
unit, unit kitchen, and medicine cabinet. 

b. Use 1.5 mm (0.0598 inch) thick stainless steel. 

c. Depth of splash backs and splash ends 25 mm (one inch) and turned 
down at least 13 mm (1/2 inch) at wall. Where faucets are located 
in splash backs, fabricate depth of splash backs 50 mm (2 inches) 
with provision made to receive required fixture. 

d. Where sinks occur fabricate top with 5 mm (3/16 inch) marine edge 
and fit flush with adjacent tops of other materials. 

e. Weld sink flush to counter top and finish to appear seamless. 

K. Molded Resin Tops: 

1. Molded resin with drip groove cut on underside of overhanging edge. 

2. Finish thickness of top minimum 25 mm (1 inch). 

3. Joints: Epoxy Type. 

4. Secure reagent shelves to counter tops with fasteners from underside 
and seal seam. 

M. Laboratory Shelf 200 mm (8 inches) deep: Fabricate of 27 mm (1-1/16 
inch) thick hardwood. Finish with black acid resisting enamel. 

N. Laboratory Shelf with Funnel and Graduate Rack 300 mm (12 inches) deep 
shelf: Fabricate of 27 mm (1-1/16 inch) thick hardwood. Finish with 
black acid resisting enamel. 

O. Laboratory Shelf 254 mm (10 inch deep): Fabricate of corrosion resisting 
steel. 

P. Pegboards: 

1. Pegboard: Fabricate of birch with black acid resisting finish and 
equip with polypropylene or unfinished hardwood pegs. 

2. Pegboard with Funnel and Graduate Rack: Fabricate of birch with black 
acid resisting finish and equip with polypropylene or unfinished 
hardwood pegs. Support rack on steel brackets. Provide CRS gutter and 
drain to sink. 

Q. Methyl Methacrylic Polymer Tops: 

1. Fabricate countertop of methyl methacrylic polymer cast sheet, 19 mm 
(3/4 inch) thick. 

2. Fabricate back splash and end splash to height shown. 

3. Fabricate skirt to depth shown. 

4. Fabricate with marine edge where sinks occur. 

5. Fabricate in one piece for full length from corner to corner up to 
3600 mm (12 feet). 

6. Join pieces with adhesive sealant. 

7. Cut out countertop for lavatories, plumbing trim. 


8. Provide concealed fasteners and epoxy cement for anchorage of sinks 
to countertop. 

R. Counter Tops for Interchangeable Furniture: Counter tops, unless 
otherwise shown, are to be capable of vertical adjustment of 150 mm (6 
inches). Fabricate tops, except CRS, in increments of units over which 
they fit with maximum length not to exceed 1950 mm (78 inches). Top 
section shall cover as many cabinet units as possible. Horizontal joints 
in counter tops at service strip and across depth of counter are be 
watertight when in place but of a type that can be easily separated and 
reset when counter top is moved up or down. Fabricate CRS tops in 
maximum lengths practicable, with field joints welded and ground smooth 
to match adjacent surfaces. Securely fasten to supporting rails with 
heavy metal fastening devices, or with screws, through pierced slots in 
such rails. Fabricate vertical splash back and reagent shelf in maximum 
length practicable of same material as working surface, except finish 
thickness shall be 19 mm (3/4 inch). 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Before installing countertops verify that wall surfaces have been 
finished as specified and that mechanical and electrical service 
locations are as required. 

B. Secure countertops to supporting rails of cabinets with metal fastening 
devices, or screws through pierced slots in rails. 

1. Where type, size or spacing of fastenings is not shown or specified, 
submit shop drawings showing proposed fastenings and method of 
installation. 

2. Use round head bolts or screws. 

3. Use epoxy or silicone to fasten the epoxy resin countertops to the 
cabinets. 

4. Use wood or sheet metal screws for wood or plastic laminate tops; 
minimum penetration into top 16 mm (5/8 inch), screw size No 8, or 
10. 

C. Rubber Moldings: 

1. Where shown install molding with butt joints in horizontal runs and 
mitered joints at corners where ceramic tile occurs omit molding. 

2. Fasten molding to wall and to splashbacks and splashends with 
adhesive. 

D. Sinks 

1. Install stainless steel sink in plastic laminate tops with epoxy 
compound to form watertight seal under shelf rim. 


a. In laboratory and pharmacy fit stainless steel sink with overflow 
standpipe. 

b. Install faucets and fittings on sink ledges with watertight seals 
where shown. 

2. Install molded resin sinks with epoxy compound to form watertight 
seal with underside of molded resin top. 

a. Install sink with not less than two channel supports with threaded 
rods and nuts at each end, expansion bolted to molded resin top. 

b. Design support for a twice the full sink weight. 

c. Install with overflow standpipes. 

3. Install methyl methacrylic polymer sinks in manufacturers recommended 
adhesive sealer or epoxy compound to underside of methyl methacrylic 
polymer countertop. 

a. Bolt or screw to countertop to prevent separation of bowl and 
fracture of adhesive sealant joint. 

b. Install drain and traps to sink. 

E. Faucets, Fixtures, and Outlets: 

1. Seal opening between fixture and top. 

2. Secure to top with manufacturers standard fittings. 

F. Range Tops, Electrical Outlets, Film Viewer: 

1. Set in cutouts with manufacturers gasket sealing joint with top to 
prevent water leakage. 

2. Install control unit and electric outlets where shown. Seal 
escutcheon plate at lap if on counter or top to prevent water 
leakage. 

3.2 PROTECTION AND CLEANING 

A. Tightly cover and protect against dirt, water, and chemical or 
mechanical injury. 

B. Clean at completion of work. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 13 05 41 
SEISMIC RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS 

 

PART 1 – GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION: 

A. Provide seismic restraint in accordance with the requirements of this 
section in order to maintain the integrity of nonstructural components 
of the building so that they remain safe and functional in case of 
seismic event. 

B. The design to resist seismic load shall be based on Seismic Design 
Categories per section 4.0 of the VA Seismic Design Requirements (H-18- 
8) dated August 2013,http://www.cfm.va.gov/til/etc/seismic.pdf. 

C. Definitions: Non-structural building components are components or 
systems that are not part of the building’s structural system whether 
inside or outside, above or below grade. Non-structural components of 
buildings include: 

1. Architectural Elements: Facades that are not part of the structural 
system and its shear resistant elements; cornices and other 
architectural projections and parapets that do not function 
structurally; glazing; nonbearing partitions; suspended ceilings;; 
cabinets; bookshelves; medical equipment; and storage racks. 

2. Electrical Elements: Power and lighting systems; substations; 
switchgear and switchboards; fire protection and alarm systems; and 
telephone and communication systems. 

3. Mechanical Elements: Heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning 
systems plumbing systems; sprinkler systems;. 

4. 

 

1.3 QUALITY CONTROL: 

A. Shop-Drawing Preparation: 

1. Have seismic-force-restraint shop drawings and calculations prepared 
by a professional structural engineer experienced in the area of 
seismic force restraints. The professional structural engineer shall 
be registered in the state where the project is located. 

2. Submit design tables and information used for the design-force 
levels, stamped and signed by a professional structural engineer 
registered in the State where project is located. 

B. Coordination: 

1. Do not install seismic restraints until seismic restraint submittals 
are approved by the Resident Engineer. 


2. Coordinate and install patient lift system or other multi-pipe hanger 
systems prior to pipe installation. 

C. Seismic Certification: 

 In structures assigned to IBC Seismic Design Category Cpermanent 
equipments and components are to have Special Seismic Certification in 
accordance with requirements of section 13.2.2 of ASCE 7 except for 
equipment that are considered rugged as listed in section 2.2 OSHPD code 
application notice CAN No. 2-1708A.5, and shall comply with section 
13.2.6 of ASCE 7. 

 

1.4 SUBMITTALS: 

A. Submit a coordinated set of equipment anchorage drawings prior to 
installation including: 

1. Description, layout, and location of items to be anchored or braced 
with anchorage or brace points noted and dimensioned. 

2. Details of anchorage or bracing at large scale with all members, 
parts brackets shown, together with all connections, bolts, welds 
etc. clearly identified and specified. 

3. Numerical value of design seismic brace loads. 

4. For expansion bolts, include design load and capacity if different 
from those specified. 

B. Submit prior to installation, a coordinated set of bracing drawings for 
seismic protection of piping, with data identifying the various supportto-
structure connections and seismic bracing structural connections, 
include: 

1. Single-line piping diagrams on a floor-by-floor basis. Show all 
suspended piping for a given floor on the same plain. 

2. Type of pipe (Copper, steel, cast iron, insulated, non-insulated, 
etc.). 

3. Pipe contents. 

4. Structural framing. 

5. Location of all gravity load pipe supports and spacing requirements. 

6. Numerical value of gravity load reactions. 

7. Location of all seismic bracing. 

8. Numerical value of applied seismic brace loads. 

9. Type of connection (Vertical support, vertical support with seismic 
brace etc.). 

10. Seismic brace reaction type (tension or compression): Details 
illustrating all support and bracing components, methods of 
connections, and specific anchors to be used. 


C. Submit prior to installation, bracing drawings for seismic protection of 
suspended ductwork and suspended electrical and communication cables, 
include: 

1. Details illustrating all support and bracing components, methods of 
connection, and specific anchors to be used. 

2. Numerical value of applied gravity and seismic loads and seismic 
loads acting on support and bracing components. 

3. Maximum spacing of hangers and bracing. 

4. Seal of registered structural engineer responsible for design. 

D. Submit design calculations prepared and sealed by the registered 
structural engineer specified above in paragraph 1.3A. 

E. Submit for concrete anchors, the appropriate ICBC evaluation reports, 
OSHPD pre-approvals, or lab test reports verifying compliance with OSHPD 
Interpretation of Regulations 28-6. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS: 

A. The Publications listed below (including amendments, addenda revisions, 
supplements and errata) form a part of this specification to the extent 
referenced. The publications are referenced in text by basic designation 
only. 

 

B. American Concrete Institute (ACI): 

355.2-07................Qualification for Post-Installed Mechanical 
Anchors in Concrete and Commentary 

C. American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC): 

 Load and Resistance Factor Design, Volume 1, Second Edition 

D. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A36/A36M-08.............Standard Specification for Carbon Structural 
Steel 

A53/A53M-10.............Standard Specification for Pipe, Steel, Black 
and Hot-Dipped, Zinc-Coated, Welded and Seamless 

A307-10.................Standard Specification for Carbon Steel Bolts 
and Studs; 60,000 PSI Tensile Strength. 

A325-10.................Standard Specification for Structural Bolts, 
Steel, Heat Treated, 120/105 ksi Minimum Tensile 
Strength 

A325M-09................Standard Specification for High-Strength Bolts 
for Structural Steel Joints [Metric] 

A490-10.................Standard Specification for Heat-Treated Steel 
Structural Bolts, 150 ksi Minimum Tensile 
Strength 


A490M-10................Standard Specification for High-Strength Steel 
Bolts, Classes 10.9 and 10.9.3, for Structural 
Steel Joints [Metric] 

A500/A500M-10...........Standard Specification for Cold-Formed Welded 
and Seamless Carbon Steel Structural Tubing in 
Rounds and Shapes 

A501-07.................Specification for Hot-Formed Welded and Seamless 
Carbon Steel Structural Tubing 

A615/A615M-09...........Standard Specification for Deformed and Plain 
Billet-Steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement 

A992/A992M-06...........Standard Specification for Steel for Structural 
Shapes for Use in Building Framing 

A996/A996M-09...........Standard Specification for Rail-Steel and Axel- 
Steel Deformed Bars for Concrete 
Reinforcement 

E488-96(R2003)..........Standard Test Method for Strength of Anchors in 
Concrete and Masonry Element 

E. American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 7) Latest Edition. 

F. International Building Code (IBC) Latest Edition 

G. VA Seismic Design Requirements, H-18-8, August 2013 

H. National Uniform Seismic Installation Guidelines (NUSIG) 

I. Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association 

 (SMACNA): Seismic Restraint Manual - Guidelines for Mechanical Systems, 
1998 Edition and Addendum 

1.6 REGULATORY REQUIREMENT: 

A. IBC Latest Edition. 

 

B. Exceptions: The seismic restraint of the following items may be omitted: 

1. Equipment weighing less than 400 pounds, which is supported directly 
on the floor or roof. 

2. Equipment weighing less than 20 pounds, which is suspended from the 
roof or floor or hung from a wall. 

5. All other piping less than 2 ½ inches inside diameter, except for 
automatic fire suppression systems. 

6. All piping suspended by individual hangers, 12 inches or less in 
length from the top of pipe to the bottom of the support for the 
hanger. 

7. All electrical conduits, less than 2 ½ inches inside diameter. 

8. All rectangular air handling ducts less than six square feet in 
cross sectional area. 

9. All round air handling ducts less than 28 inches in diameter. 


10. All ducts suspended by hangers 12 inches or less in length from the 
top of the duct to the bottom of support for the hanger. 

PART 2 – PRODUCTS 

2.1 STEEL: 

A. Structural Steel: ASTM A36. 

B. Structural Tubing: ASTM A500, Grade B. 

E. Bolts & Nuts: ASTM A307. 

2.2 CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE: 

A. Concrete: 28 day strength, f’c = 3,000 psi and 4,000 psi 

B. Reinforcing Steel: ASTM A615/615M or ASTM A996/A996M deformed. 

PART 3 – EXECUTION 

3.1 CONSTRUCTION, GENERAL: 

A. Provide equipment supports and anchoring devices to withstand the 
seismic design forces, so that when seismic design forces are applied, 
the equipment cannot displace, overturn, or become inoperable. 

B. Provide anchorages in conformance with recommendations of the equipment 
manufacturer and as shown on approved shop drawings and calculations. 

C. Construct seismic restraints and anchorage to allow for thermal 
expansion. 

D. Testing Before Final Inspection: 

1. Test 10-percent of anchors in masonry and concrete per ASTM E488, and 
ACI 355.2 to determine that they meet the required load capacity. If 
any anchor fails to meet the required load, test the next 20 
consecutive anchors, which are required to have zero failure, before 
resuming the 10-percent testing frequency. 

2. Before scheduling Final Inspection, submit a report on this testing 
indicating the number and location of testing, and what anchor-loads 
were obtained. 

3.2 EQUIPMENT RESTRAINT AND BRACING: 

A. See drawings for equipment to be restrained or braced. 

 

3.3 MECHANICAL DUCTWORK AND PIPING; ELECTRICAL BUSWAYS, CONDUITS, AND CABLE 
TRAYS; AND TELECOMMUNICATION WIRES AND CABLE TRAYS 

A. Support and brace mechanical ductwork and piping; electrical busways, 
conduits and cable trays; and telecommunication wires and cable trays to 
resist directional forces (lateral, longitudinal and vertical). 

B. Brace duct and breeching branches with a minimum of 1 brace per branch. 

D. Provide supports and anchoring so that, upon application of seismic 
forces, piping remains fully connected as operable systems which will 
not displace sufficiently to damage adjacent or connecting equipment, or 
building members. 


E. Seismic Restraint of Piping: 

1. Design criteria: 

a. Piping resiliently supported: Restrain to support 120-percent of 
the weight of the systems and components and contents. 

b. Piping not resiliently supported: Restrain to support 60-percent 
of the weight of the system components and contents. 

F. Piping Connections: Provide flexible connections where pipes connect to 
equipment. Make the connections capable of accommodating relative 
differential movements between the pipe and equipment under conditions 
of earthquake shaking. 

3.4 PARTITIONS 

 

 

3.5 CEILINGS AND LIGHTING FIXTURES 

 

A. At regular intervals, laterally brace suspended ceilings against lateral 
and vertical movements, and provide with a physical separation at the 
walls. 

B. Independently support and laterally brace all lighting fixtures. Refer 
to applicable portion of lighting specification, Section 26 51 00, 
INTERIOR LIGHTING. 

3.6 FACADES AND GLAZING 

 

B. Tie brick veneers to a separate wall that is independent of the steel 
frame as shown on construction drawings to ensure strength against 
applicable seismic forces at the project location. 

C. Install attachments to structure for all façade materials as shown on 
construction drawings to ensure strength against applicable seismic 
forces at the project location. 

3.7 STORAGE RACKS, CABINETS, AND BOOKCASES 

A. Install storage racks to withstand earthquake forces and anchored to the 
floor or laterally braced from the top to the structural elements. 

B. Anchor medical supply cabinets to the floor or walls and equip them with 
properly engaged, lockable latches. 

C. Anchor filing cabinets that are more than 2 drawers high to the floor or 
walls, and equip all drawers with properly engaged, lockable latches. 

D. Anchor bookcases that are more than 30 inches high to the floor or 
walls, and equip any doors with properly engaged, lockable latches. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 21 05 11 
COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR FIRE SUPPRESSION 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. The requirements of this Section apply to all sections of Division 21. 

B. Definitions: 

1. Exposed: Piping and equipment exposed to view in finished rooms. 

2. Option or optional: Contractor's choice of an alternate material or 
method. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
B. Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 


C. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

D. Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

E. Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STRUCTURAL 
COMPONENTS 

F. Section 26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS 

 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Products Criteria: 

1. Standard Products: Material and equipment shall be the standard 
products of a manufacturer regularly engaged in the manufacture of 
the products for at least 3 years. See other specification sections 
for any exceptions. 

2. Equipment Service: Products shall be supported by a service 
organization which maintains a complete inventory of repair parts and 
is located reasonably close to the site. 

3. Multiple Units: When two or more units of materials or equipment of 
the same type or class are required, these units shall be products of 
one manufacturer. 

4. Assembled Units: Manufacturers of equipment assemblies, which use 
components made by others, assume complete responsibility for the 
final assembled product. 

5. Nameplates: Nameplate bearing manufacturer's name or identifiable 
trademark shall be securely affixed in a conspicuous place on 
equipment, or name or trademark cast integrally with equipment, 
stamped or otherwise permanently marked on each item of equipment. 

6. Asbestos products or equipment or materials containing asbestos shall 
not be used. 


B. Manufacturer's Recommendations: Where installation procedures or any 
part thereof are required to be in accordance with the recommendations 
of the manufacturer of the material being installed, printed copies of 
these recommendations shall be furnished to the Resident Engineer prior 
to installation. Installation of the item will not be allowed to proceed 
until the recommendations are received. Failure to furnish these 
recommendations can be cause for rejection of the material. 

C. Guaranty: In GENERAL CONDITIONS. 

D. Supports for sprinkler piping shall be in conformance with NFPA 13. 

E. Supports for standpipe shall be in conformance with NFPA 14. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: Submit under the pertinent section 
rather than under this section. 

1. Equipment and materials identification. 

2. Fire-stopping materials. 

3. Hangers, inserts, supports and bracing. Provide load calculations for 
variable spring and constant support hangers. 

4. Wall, floor, and ceiling plates. 

C. Coordination Drawings: Provide detailed layout drawings of all piping 
systems. Provide details of the following. 

1. Mechanical equipment rooms. 

2. Interstitial space. 

3. Hangers, inserts, supports, and bracing. 

4. Pipe sleeves. 

5. Equipment penetrations of floors, walls, ceilings, or roofs. 

D. Maintenance Data and Operating Instructions: 

1. Maintenance and operating manuals in accordance with Section 01 00 
00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, Article, INSTRUCTIONS, for systems and 
equipment. 

2. Provide a listing of recommended replacement parts for keeping in 
stock supply, including sources of supply, for equipment. Include in 
the listing belts for equipment. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A36/A36M-2001...........Carbon Structural Steel 


A575-96.................Steel Bars, Carbon, Merchant Quality, M-Grades R 
(2002) 

E84-2003................Standard Test Method for Burning Characteristics 
of Building Materials 

E119-2000...............Standard Test Method for Fire Tests of Building 
Construction and Materials 

C. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

90A-96..................Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating 
Systems 

101-97..................Life Safety Code 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 LIFTING ATTACHMENTS 

 Provide equipment with suitable lifting attachments to enable equipment 
to be lifted in its normal position. Lifting attachments shall withstand 
any handling conditions that might be encountered, without bending or 
distortion of shape, such as rapid lowering and braking of load. 

 

2.2 EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS IDENTIFICATION 

 A. Use symbols, nomenclature and equipment numbers specified, shown on the 
drawings and shown in the maintenance manuals. Identification for piping 
is specified in Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

B. Valve Tags and Lists: 

1. Valve tags: Engraved black filled numbers and letters not less than 
13 mm (1/2-inch) high for number designation, and not less than 6.4 
mm(1/4-inch) for service designation on 19 gage 38 mm (1-1/2 inches) 
round brass disc, attached with brass "S" hook or brass chain. 

2. Valve lists: Typed or printed plastic coated card(s), sized 216 mm 
(8-1/2 inches) by 280 mm (11 inches) showing tag number, valve 
function and area of control, for each service or system. Punch 
sheets for a 3-ring notebook. 

3. Provide detailed plan for each floor of the building indicating the 
location and valve number for each valve. Identify location of each 
valve with a color coded thumb tack in ceiling. 

2.5 FIRESTOPPING 

 Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING specifies an effective barrier against 
the spread of fire, smoke and gases where penetrations occur for piping. 

2.6 GALVANIZED REPAIR COMPOUND 

 Mil. Spec. DOD-P-21035B, paint form. 


AK2.7 PIPE PENETRATIONS 

A. Install sleeves during construction for other than blocked out floor 
openings for risers in mechanical bays. 

B. To prevent accidental liquid spills from passing to a lower level, 
provide the following: 

1. For sleeves: Extend sleeve 25 mm (one inch) above finished floor and 
provide sealant for watertight joint. 

2. For blocked out floor openings: Provide 40 mm (1-1/2 inch) angle set 
in silicone adhesive around opening. 

3. For drilled penetrations: Provide 40 mm (1-1/2 inch) angle ring or 
square set in silicone adhesive around penetration. 

C. Penetrations are not allowed through beams or ribs, but may be installed 
in concrete beam flanges. Any deviation from this requirement must 
receive prior approval of Resident Engineer. 

D. Sheet Metal, Plastic, or Moisture-resistant Fiber Sleeves: Provide for 
pipe passing through floors, interior walls, and partitions, unless 
brass or steel pipe sleeves are specifically called for below. 

E. Cast Iron or Zinc Coated Pipe Sleeves: Provide for pipe passing through 
exterior walls below grade. Make space between sleeve and pipe 
watertight with a modular or link rubber seal. Seal shall be applied at 
both ends of sleeve. 

F. Galvanized Steel or an alternate Black Iron Pipe with asphalt coating 
Sleeves: Provide for pipe passing through concrete beam flanges, except 
where brass pipe sleeves are called for. Provide sleeve for pipe passing 
through floor of mechanical rooms, laundry work rooms, and animal rooms 
above basement. Except in mechanical rooms, connect sleeve with floor 
plate. 

G. Brass Pipe Sleeves: Provide for pipe passing through quarry tile, 
terrazzo or ceramic tile floors. Connect sleeve with floor plate. 

H. Sleeves are not required for wall hydrants for fire department 
connections or in drywall construction. 

I. Sleeve Clearance: Sleeve through floors, walls, partitions, and beam 
flanges shall be one inch greater in diameter than external diameter of 
pipe. Sleeve for pipe with insulation shall be large enough to 
accommodate the insulation. Interior openings shall be caulked tight 
with fire stopping material and sealant to prevent the spread of fire, 
smoke, and gases. 

J. Sealant and Adhesives: Shall be as specified in Section 07 92 00, JOINT 
SEALANTS. 


2.8 TOOLS AND LUBRICANTS 

A. Furnish, and turn over to the Resident Engineer, special tools not 
readily available commercially, that are required for disassembly or 
adjustment of equipment and machinery furnished. 

B. Grease Guns with Attachments for Applicable Fittings: One for each type 
of grease required for each motor or other equipment. 

C. Tool Containers: Hardwood or metal, permanently identified for in tended 
service and mounted, or located, where directed by the Resident 
Engineer. 

D. Lubricants: A minimum of 0.95 L (one quart) of oil, and 0.45 kg (one 
pound) of grease, of equipment manufacturer's recommended grade and 
type, in unopened containers and properly identified as to use for each 
different application. 

2.9 WALL, FLOOR AND CEILING PLATES 

A. Material and Type: Chrome plated brass or chrome plated steel, one piece 
or split type with concealed hinge, with set screw for fastening to 
pipe, or sleeve. Use plates that fit tight around pipes, cover openings 
around pipes and cover the entire pipe sleeve projection. 

B. Thickness: Not less than 2.4 mm (3/32-inch) for floor plates. For wall 
and ceiling plates, not less than 0.64 mm (0.025-inch) for up to 80 mm 
(3-inch pipe), 0.89 mm (0.035-inch) for larger pipe. 

C. Locations: Use where pipe penetrates floors, walls and ceilings in 
exposed locations, in finished areas only. Use also where insulation 
ends on exposed water supply pipe drop from overhead. Provide a 
watertight joint in spaces where brass or steel pipe sleeves are 
specified. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Coordinate location of piping, sleeves, inserts, hangers, and equipment. 
Locate piping, sleeves, inserts, hangers, and equipment clear of 
windows, doors, openings, light outlets, and other services and 
utilities. Follow manufacturer's published recommendations for 
installation methods not otherwise specified. 

B. Protection and Cleaning: 

1. Equipment and materials shall be carefully handled, properly stored, 
and adequately protected to prevent damage before and during 
installation, in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations 
and as approved by the Resident Engineer. Damaged or defective items 
in the opinion of the Resident Engineer, shall be replaced. 


2. Protect all finished parts of equipment, such as shafts and bearings 
where accessible, from rust prior to operation by means of protective 
grease coating and wrapping. Close pipe openings with caps or plugs 
during installation. Tightly cover and protect equipment against 
dirt, water chemical, or mechanical injury. At completion of all work 
thoroughly exposed materials and equipment. 

C. Concrete and Grout: Use concrete and shrink compensating grout 25 MPa 
(3000 psi) minimum, specified in Section 03 30 00, CAST-IN-PLACE 
CONCRETE. 

D. Install gages, valves, and other devices with due regard for ease in 
reading or operating and maintaining said devices. Locate and position 
gages to be easily read by operator or staff standing on floor or 
walkway provided. Servicing shall not require dismantling adjacent 
equipment or pipe work. 

E. Work in Existing Building: 

1. Perform as specified in Article, OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS, 
Article, ALTERATIONS, and Article, RESTORATION of the Section 01 00 
00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS for relocation of existing equipment, 
alterations and restoration of existing building(s). 

2. As specified in Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, Article, 
OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS, make alterations to existing service 
piping at times that will least interfere with normal operation of 
the facility. 

3. Cut required openings through existing masonry and reinforced 
concrete using diamond core drills. Use of pneumatic hammer type 
drills, impact type electric drills, and hand or manual hammer type 
drills, will be permitted only with approval of the Resident 
Engineer. Locate openings that will least effect structural slabs, 
columns, ribs or beams. Refer to the Resident Engineer for 
determination of proper design for openings through structural 
sections and opening layouts approval, prior to cutting or drilling 
into structure. After Resident Engineer's approval, carefully cut 
opening through construction no larger than absolutely necessary for 
the required installation. 

F. Work in Animal Research Areas: Seal all pipe penetrations with silicone 
sealant to prevent entrance of insects. 

G. Switchgear Drip Protection: Every effort shall be made to eliminate the 
installation of pipe above electrical and telephone switchgear. If this 
is not possible, encase pipe in a second pipe with a minimum of joints. 


H. Inaccessible Equipment: 

1. Where the Government determines that the Contractor has installed 
equipment not conveniently accessible for operation and maintenance, 
equipment shall be removed and reinstalled or remedial action 
performed as directed at no additional cost to the Government. 

2. The term "conveniently accessible" is defined as capable of being 
reached without the use of ladders, or without climbing or crawling 
under or over obstacles such as motors, fans, pumps, belt guards, 
transformers, high voltage lines, piping, and ductwork. 

3.2 LUBRICATION 

 Field check and lubricate equipment requiring lubrication prior to 
initial operation. 

3.3 STARTUP AND TEMPORARY OPERATION 

 Start up equipment as described in equipment specifications. Verify that 
vibration is within specified tolerance prior to extended operation. 
Temporary use of equipment is specified in Section 01 00 00, GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS, Article, TEMPORARY USE OF MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL 
EQUIPMENT. 

3.4 OPERATING AND PERFORMANCE TESTS 

A. Prior to the final inspection, perform required tests as specified in 
Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, Article, TESTS and submit the 
test reports and records to the Resident Engineer. 

B. Should evidence of malfunction in any tested system, or piece of 
equipment or component part thereof, occur during or as a result of 
tests, make proper corrections, repairs or replacements, and repeat 
tests at no additional cost to the Government. 

C. When completion of certain work or system occurs at a time when final 
control settings and adjustments cannot be properly made to make 
performance tests, then make performance tests for heating systems and 
for cooling systems respectively during first actual seasonal use of 
respective systems following completion of work. 

3.6 INSTRUCTIONS TO VA PERSONNEL 

 Provide in accordance with Article, INSTRUCTIONS, of Section 01 00 00, 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 21 08 00 

COMMISSIONING OF FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. The requirements of this Section apply to all sections of Division 21. 

B. This project will have selected building systems commissioned. The 
complete list of equipment and systems to be commissioned is specified 
in Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. The 
commissioning process, which the Contractor is responsible to execute, 
is defined in Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIRMENTS. A 
Commissioning Agent (CxA) appointed by the VA will manage the 
commissioning process. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 00 00 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
B. Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. 
C. Section 01 33 23 SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 


1.3 SUMMARY 

A. This Section includes requirements for commissioning the Fire 
Suppression systems, subsystems and equipment. This Section 
supplements the general requirements specified in Section 01 91 00 
General Commissioning Requirements. 

B. Refer to Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS for more 
details regarding processes and procedures as well as roles and 
responsibilities for all Commissioning Team members. 

1.4 DEFINITIONS 

A. Refer to Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS for 
definitions. 

1.5 COMMISSIONED SYSTEMS 

A. Commissioning of a system or systems specified in Division 21 is part 
of the construction process. Documentation and testing of these 
systems, as well as training of the VA’s Operation and Maintenance 
personnel in accordance with the requirements of Section 01 91 00 and 
of Division 21, is required in cooperation with the VA and the 
Commissioning Agent. 

B. The Fire Suppression systems commissioning will include the systems 
listed in Section 01 19 00 General Commissioning Requirements: 


1.6 SUBMITTALS 

A. The commissioning process requires review of selected Submittals. The 
Commissioning Agent will provide a list of submittals that will be 
reviewed by the Commissioning Agent. This list will be reviewed and 
approved by the VA prior to forwarding to the Contractor. Refer to 
Section 01 33 23 SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, and SAMPLES for further 
details. 

B. The commissioning process requires Submittal review simultaneously with 
engineering review. Specific submittal requirements related to the 
commissioning process are specified in Section 01 91 00 GENERAL 
COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS 

A. Commissioning of the building fire suppression systems will require 
inspection of individual elements of the fire suppression construction 
throughout the construction period. The Contractor shall coordinate 
with the Commissioning Agent in accordance with Section 01 19 00 and 
the Commissioning plan to schedule inspections as required to support 
the Commissioning Process. 

3.2 PRE-FUNCTIONAL CHECKLISTS 

A. The Contractor shall complete Pre-Functional Checklists to verify 
systems, subsystems, and equipment installation is complete and systems 
are ready for Systems Functional Performance Testing. The 
Commissioning Agent will prepare Pre-Functional Checklists to be used 
to document equipment installation. The Contractor shall complete the 
checklists. Completed checklists shall be submitted to the VA and to 
the Commissioning Agent for review. The Commissioning Agent may spot 
check a sample of completed checklists. If the Commissioning Agent 
determines that the information provided on the checklist is not 
accurate, the Commissioning Agent will return the marked-up checklist 
to the Contractor for correction and resubmission. If the 
Commissioning Agent determines that a significant number of completed 
checklists for similar equipment are not accurate, the Commissioning 
Agent will select a broader sample of checklists for review. If the 
Commissioning Agent determines that a significant number of the broader 
sample of checklists is also inaccurate, all the checklists for the 
type of equipment will be returned to the Contractor for correction and 


resubmission. Refer to SECTION 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING 
REQUIREMENTS for submittal requirements for Pre-Functional Checklists, 
Equipment Startup Reports, and other commissioning documents. 

3.3 CONTRACTORS TESTS 

A. Contractor tests as required by other sections of Division 21 shall be 
scheduled and documented in accordance with Section 01 00 00 GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS. All testing shall be incorporated into the project 
schedule. Contractor shall provide no less than 7 calendar days’ 
notice of testing. The Commissioning Agent will witness selected 
Contractor tests at the sole discretion of the Commissioning Agent. 
Contractor tests shall be completed prior to scheduling Systems 
Functional Performance Testing. 

3.4 SYSTEMS FUNCTIONAL PERFORMANCE TESTING 

A. The Commissioning Process includes Systems Functional Performance 
Testing that is intended to test systems functional performance under 
steady state conditions, to test system reaction to changes in 
operating conditions, and system performance under emergency 
conditions. The Commissioning Agent will prepare detailed Systems 
Functional Performance Test procedures for review and approval by the 
Resident Engineer. The Contractor shall review and comment on the 
tests prior to approval. The Contractor shall provide the required 
labor, materials, and test equipment identified in the test procedure 
to perform the tests. The Commissioning Agent will witness and 
document the testing. The Contractor shall sign the test reports to 
verify tests were performed. See Section 01 91 00 GENERAL 
COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS, for additional details. 

3.5 TRAINING OF VA PERSONNEL 

A. Training of the VA operation and maintenance personnel is required in 
cooperation with the Resident Engineer and Commissioning Agent. 
Provide competent, factory authorized personnel to provide instruction 
to operation and maintenance personnel concerning the location, 
operation, and troubleshooting of the installed systems. Contractor 
shall submit training agendas and trainer resumes in accordance with 
the requirements of Section 01 19 00. The instruction shall be 
scheduled in coordination with the VA Resident Engineer after 
submission and approval of formal training plans. Refer to Section 01 
91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS and Division 21 Sections for 
additional Contractor training requirements. 


----- END ----- 

 

 


SECTION 21 13 13 
WET-PIPE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

 

1.1 SCOPE OF WORK 

A. Design, installation and testing shall be in accordance with 

NFPA 13 except for specified exceptions. 

B. The design and installation of a hydraulically calculated automatic wet 
system complete and ready for operation, for the new first floor 
renovated areas shown on the drawings. 

 C. Modification of the existing sprinkler system as indicated on the 
drawings and as further required by these specifications. Modifications 
include, but are not limited to, the relocation of existing sprinklers 
for new wall/room layouts and the adjustment of branch line, cross main 
and feed main piping based on hydraulic calculations. The final system 
shall provide for 100% sprinkler coverage in all renovated areas. 
Sprinkler systems to be renovated which also supply sprinklered areas 
outside of the work area shall remian in service at all times except for 
scheduled outages for tie-ins. 

D. The VA Medical Center is located in a moderate high seismic zone. A 
seismic design category C is assigned. Seismic bracing for sprinkler 
piping is required in accordance with NFPA 13, Paragraph 9.3. Seismic 
bracing shall be provided for all new and existing sprinkler piping 
associated with the renovated areas. A seismic coefficient Cp = 0.38 
shall be used for the calculation of horizontal seismic loads. 

 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING, Treatment of penetrations through rated 
enclosures. 

C. Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

D. Section 21 12 00, FIRE-SUPPRESSION STANDPIPES. 

E. Section 28 31 00, FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM, Connection to fire alarm of 
flow switches, pressure switches and valve supervisory switches. 

F. Section 21 05 11 COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR FIRE SUPPRESSION 

 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Installer Reliability: The installer shall possess a valid State of 
South Carolina fire sprinkler contractor's license. The installer shall 


have been actively and successfully engaged in the installation of 
commercial automatic sprinkler systems for the past ten years. 

B. Materials and Equipment: All equipment and devices shall be of a make 
and type listed by UL and approved by FM, or other nationally recognized 
testing laboratory for the specific purpose for which it is used. All 
materials, devices, and equipment shall be approved by the VA. 

C. Submittals: Submit as one package in accordance with Section 01 33 23, 
SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. Prepare detailed working 
drawings that are signed by a NICET Level III or Level IV Sprinkler 
Technician or stamped by a Registered Professional Engineer practicing 
in the field of Fire Protection Engineering. As Government review is for 
technical adequacy only, the installer remains responsible for 
correcting any conflicts with other trades and building construction 
that arise during installation. Partial submittals will not be 
accepted. Material submittals shall be approved prior to the purchase or 
delivery to the job site. Suitably bind submittals in notebooks or 
binders and provide index referencing the appropriate specification 
section. Submittals shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 

1. Qualifications: 

a. Provide a copy of the installing contractor’s fire sprinkler and 
state contractor’s license. 

b. Provide a copy of the NICET certification for the NICET Level III 
or Level IV Sprinkler Technician who prepared and signed the 
detailed working drawings unless the drawings are stamped by a 
Registered Professional Engineer practicing in the field of Fire 
Protection Engineering. 

2. Drawings: Submit detailed 1:100 (1/8 inch) scale (minimum) working 
drawings conforming to NFPA 13. Include a site plan showing the 
piping to the water supply test location. 

3. Manufacturers Data Sheets: 

a. Provide for materials and equipment proposed for use on the 
system. Include listing information and installation instructions 
in data sheets. Where data sheet describes items in addition to 
that item being submitted, clearly identify proposed item on the 
sheet. 

4. Calculation Sheets: Submit hydraulic calculation sheets in tabular 
form conforming to the requirements and recommendations of NFPA 13. 

5. Final Document Submittals: Provide as-built drawings, testing and 
maintenance instructions in accordance with the requirements in 
Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 
Submittals shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 


a. One complete set of reproducible as-built drawings showing the 
installed system with the specific interconnections between the 
waterflow switch or pressure switch and the fire alarm equipment. 

b. Complete, simple, understandable, step-by-step, testing 
instructions giving recommended and required testing frequency of 
all equipment, methods for testing all equipment, and a complete 
trouble shooting manual. Provide maintenance instructions on 
replacing any components of the system including internal parts, 
periodic cleaning and adjustment of the equipment and components 
with information as to the address and telephone number of both 
the manufacturer and the local supplier of each item. 

c. Material and Testing Certificate: Upon completion of the sprinkler 
system installation or any partial section of the system, 
including testing and flushing, provide a copy of a completed 
Material and Testing Certificate as indicated in NFPA 13. 

d. Certificates shall document all parts of the installation. 

e. Instruction Manual: Provide one copy of the instruction manual 
covering the system in a flexible protective cover and mount in an 
accessible location adjacent to the riser. 

D. Design Basis Information: Provide design, materials, equipment, 
installation, inspection, and testing of the automatic sprinkler system 
in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 13. Recommendations in 
appendices shall be treated as requirements. 

1. Perform hydraulic calculations in accordance with NFPA 13 utilizing 
the Area/Density method. Do not restrict design area reductions 
permitted for using quick response sprinklers throughout by the 
required use of standard response sprinklers in the areas identified 
in this section. 

2. Sprinkler Protection: To determining spacing and sizing, apply the 
following coverage classifications: 

a. Light Hazard Occupancies: Patient care, treatment, and customary 
access areas. 

b. Ordinary Hazard Group 1 Occupancies: Laboratories, Mechanical 
Equipment Rooms, Transformer Rooms, Electrical Switchgear Rooms, 
Electric Closets,. 

c. Ordinary Hazard Group 2 Occupancies: Storage rooms, trash rooms, 
clean and soiled linen rooms, pharmacy and associated storage, 
laundry, kitchens, kitchen storage areas, retail stores, retail 
store storage rooms, storage areas, building management storage, 
boiler plants, energy centers, warehouse spaces, file storage 


areas for the entire area of the space up to 140 square meters 
(1500 square feet) and Supply Processing and Distribution (SPD). 

d. Request clarification from the Government for any hazard 
classification not identified. 

3. Hydraulic Calculations: Calculated demand including hose stream 
requirements shall fall no less than 10 percent below the available 
water supply curve. 

4. Water Supply: Base water supply the existing 1,500 gpm at 125 psi 
fire pump. 

5. Zoning: 

a. For each sprinkler zone reused the existing control valve, flow 
switch and a test and drain assembly with pressure gauge shall be 
reused unless hydraulic calculations require a different size. 

 b. Sprinkler zones shall conform to the smoke barrier zones shown on 
the drawings. 

 c. Provide seismic protection in accordance with NFPA 13. The VA 
Medical Center is located in a moderate high seismic zone. A 
seismic design category C is assigned. Seismic bracing for 
sprinkler piping is required in accordance with NFPA 13, Paragraph 
9.3. Seismic bracing shall be provided for all new and existing 
sprinkler piping associated with the renovated areas. A seismic 
coefficient Cp = 0.38 shall be used for the calculation of 
horizontal seismic loads. 

 

1.4 APPLICABLE PUIBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

 

B. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

13-2013.................Installation of Sprinkler Systems 

101-2012................Safety to Life from Fire in Buildings and 
Structures (Life Safety Code) 

170-1999................Fire Safety Symbols 

 

C. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 
Fire Protection Equipment Directory – 2012 

D. Factory Mutual Engineering Corporation (FM): 

Approval Guide – 2012 

E. International Building Code – 2012 

F. Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research-2005 


PART 2 PRODUCTS 

2.1 PIPING & FITTINGS 

A. Sprinkler systems in accordance with NFPA 13. Use nonferrous piping in 
MRI Scanning Rooms. 

2.2 VALVES 

A. Valves in accordance with NFPA 13. 

B. Do not use quarter turn ball valves for 50 mm (2 inch) or larger drain 
valves. 


C. The wet system control valve shall be a listed indicating type valve. 
Control valve shall be UL Listed and FM Approved for fire protection 
installations. System control valve shall be rated for normal system 
pressure but in no case less than 175 PSI. (No Substitutions Allowed). 

2.4 SPRINKLERS 

A. All sprinklers except “institutional” type sprinklers shall be FM 
approved. “Institutional” type sprinklers in Mental Health and Behavior 
Units shall be UL listed or FM approved quick response type. Maximum 
break away strength shall be certified by the manufacturer to be no more 
than 39 kPa (85 pounds). Provide quick response sprinklers in all areas, 
except where specifically prohibited by their listing or approval. 

B. Temperature Ratings: In accordance with NFPA 13, except as follows: 

1. Sprinklers in elevator shafts, elevator pits, and elevator machine 
rooms: Intermediate temperature rated. 

2. Sprinklers in Generator Rooms: High temperature rated. 

2.5 SPRINKLER CABINET 

 Provide sprinkler cabinet with the required number of sprinkler heads of 
all ratings and types installed, and a sprinkler wrench for each system. 
Locate adjacent to the riser. Sprinkler heads shall be installed in 
center of tile or center to center. 

2.6 IDENTIFICATION SIGNS/HYDRAULIC PLACARDS 

 Plastic, steel or aluminum signs with white lettering on a red 
background with holes for easy attachment. Enter pertinent data for each 
system on the hydraulic placard. 

2.7 SWITCHES: 

A. Contain in a weatherproof die cast/red baked enamel, oil resistant, 
aluminum housing with tamper resistant screws, 13 mm (1/2 inch) conduit 
entrance and necessary facilities for attachment to the valves. Provide 
two SPDT switches rated at 2.5 amps at 24 VDC. 

B. Water flow Alarm Switches: Mechanical, non-coded, non-accumulative 
retard and adjustable from 0 to 60 seconds minimum. Set flow switches at 
an initial setting between 20 and 30 seconds. 


C. Valve Supervisory Switches for Ball and Butterfly Valves: May be 
integral with the valve. 

 

2.8 GAUGES 

 Provide gauges as required by NFPA 13. 

2.9 PIPE HANGERS AND SUPPORTS 

 Supports, hangers, etc., of an approved pattern placement to conform to 
NFPA 13. System piping shall be substantially supported to the building 
structure. The installation of hangers and supports shall adhere to the 
requirements set forth in NFPA 13, Standard for Installation of 
Sprinkler Systems. Materials used in the installation or construction of 
hangers and supports shall be listed and approved for such application. 
Hangers or supports not specifically listed for service shall be 
designed and bear the seal of a professional engineer. 

 

2.10 SUPPORTS SUPPORTS 

 The VA Medical Center is located in a moderate high seismic zone. A 
seismic design category C is assigned. Seismic bracing for sprinkler 
piping is required in accordance with NFPA 13, Paragraph 9.3. Seismic 
bracing shall be provided for all new and existing sprinkler piping 
associated with the renovated areas. A seismic coefficient Cp = 0.38 
shall be used for the calculation of horizontal seismic loads. 

2.11 WALL, FLOOR AND CEILING PLATES 

 Provide chrome plated steel escutcheon plates for exposed piping passing 
though walls, floors or ceilings. 

 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Installation shall be accomplished by the licensed contractor. Provide a 
qualified technician, experienced in the installation and operation of 
the type of system being installed, to supervise the installation and 
testing of the system. 

B. Installation of Piping: Accurately cut pipe to measurements established 
by the installer and work into place without springing or forcing. In 
any situation where bending of the pipe is required, use a standard 
pipe-bending template. Install concealed piping in spaces that have 
finished ceilings. Where ceiling mounted equipment exists, such as in 
operating and radiology rooms, install sprinklers so as not to obstruct 
the movement or operation of the equipment. Sidewall heads may need to 
be utilized. Locate piping in stairways as near to the ceiling as 
possible to prevent tampering by unauthorized personnel, and to provide 


a minimum headroom clearance of 2250 mm (seven feet six inches). To 
prevent an obstruction to egress, provide piping clearances in 
accordance with NFPA 101. 

C. Welding: Conform to the requirements and recommendations of NFPA 13. 

D. Drains: Pipe drains to discharge at safe points outside of the building 
or to sight cones attached to drains of adequate size to readily carry 
the full flow from each drain under maximum pressure. Do not provide a 
direct drain connection to sewer system or discharge into sinks. Install 
drips and drains where necessary and required by NFPA 13. 

E. Supervisory Switches: Provide supervisory switches for sprinkler control 
valves. 

F. Waterflow Alarm Switches: Install waterflow switch and adjacent valves 
in easily accessible locations. 

G. Inspector's Test Connection: Install and supply in conformance with NFPA 
13, locate in a secured area, and discharge to the exterior of the 
building. 

H. Affix cutout disks, which are created by cutting holes in the walls of 
pipe for flow switches and non-threaded pipe connections to the 
respective waterflow switch or pipe connection near to the pipe from 
where they were cut. 

I. Sleeves: Provide for pipes passing through masonry or concrete. Provide 
space between the pipe and the sleeve in accordance with NFPA 13. Seal 
this space with a UL Listed through penetration fire stop material in 
accordance with Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. Where core drilling is 
used in lieu of sleeves, also seal space. Seal penetrations of walls, 
floors and ceilings of other types of construction, in accordance with 
Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

J. Provide pressure gauge at each water flow alarm switch location and at 
each main drain connection. 

K. Firestopping shall comply with Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

L. Securely attach identification signs to control valves, drain valves, 
and test valves. Locate hydraulic placard information signs at each 
sectional control valve where there is a zone water flow switch. 

M. Repairs: Repair damage to the building or equipment resulting from the 
installation of the sprinkler system by the installer at no additional 
expense to the Government. 

N. Interruption of Service: There shall be no interruption of the existing 
sprinkler protection, water, electric, or fire alarm services without 
prior permission of the Contracting Officer. Contractor shall develop an 
interim fire protection program where interruptions involve in occupied 


spaces. Request in writing at least one week prior to the planned 
interruption. 

3.2 INSPECTION AND TEST 

A. Preliminary Testing: Flush newly installed systems prior to performing 
hydrostatic tests in order to remove any debris which may have been left 
as well as ensuring piping is unobstructed. Hydrostatically test system, 
including the fire department connections, as specified in NFPA 13, in 
the presence of the Contracting Officers Technical Representative (COTR) 
or his designated representative. Test and flush underground water line 
prior to performing these hydrostatic tests. 

B. Final Inspection and Testing: Subject system to tests in accordance with 
NFPA 13, and when all necessary corrections have been accomplished, 
advise COTR/Resident Engineer to schedule a final inspection and test. 
Connection to the fire alarm system shall have been in service for at 
least ten days prior to the final inspection, with adjustments made to 
prevent false alarms. Furnish all instruments, labor and materials 
required for the tests and provide the services of the installation 
foreman or other competent representative of the installer to perform 
the tests. Correct deficiencies and retest system as necessary, prior to 
the final acceptance. Include the operation of all features of the 
systems under normal operations in test. 

3.3 INSTRUCTIONS 

 Furnish the services of a competent instructor for not less than two 
hours for instructing personnel in the operation and maintenance of the 
system, on the dates requested by the COTR/Resident Engineer. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 22 05 11 

COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. The requirements of this Section shall apply to all sections of 
Division 22. 

B. Definitions: 

1. Exposed: Piping and equipment exposed to view in finished rooms. 

C. Abbreviations/Acronyms: 

1. AISI: American Iron and Steel Institute 

2. COR: Contracting Officer’s Representative 

3. CPVC: Chlorinated Polyvinyl Chloride 

 4. CWP: Cold Working Pressure 

 5. db(A): Decibels (A weighted) 

 6. DDC: Direct Digital Control 

 7. DWV: Drainage, Waste and Vent 

 8. ECC: Engineering Control Center 

 9. HDPE: High Density Polyethylene 

10. HP: Horsepower 

11. ID: Inside Diameter 

12. NPS: Nominal Pipe Size 

13. NPT: National Pipe Thread 

14. OD: Outside Diameter 

15. PVC: Polyvinyl Chloride 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

B. Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

C. Section 01 74 19, CONSTRUCTION WASTE MANAGEMENT. 

D. Section 01 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS. 

 E. Section 01 91 00, GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS 

 F. Section 03 30 00, CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE: Concrete and Grout. 

 G. Section 05 31 00, STEEL DECKING: Building Components for Attachment of 
Hangers. 

 H. Section 05 36 00, COMPOSITE METAL DECKING: Building Components for 
Attachment of Hangers. 

I. Section 05 50 00, METAL FABRICATIONS. 

J. Section 07 60 00, FLASHING AND SHEET METAL: Flashing for Wall and Roof 
Penetrations. 


K. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

L. Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

M. Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

 N. Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STRUCTURAL 
COMPONENTS. 

O. Section 22 05 12, GENERAL MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR PLUMBING EQUIPMENT. 

P. Section 22 07 11, PLUMBING INSULATION. 

 Q. Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 

 R. Section 23 09 23, DIRECT-DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC. 

S. Section 26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

T. Section 26 05 19, LOW-VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLES. 

U. Section 26 29 11, MOTOR CONTROLLERS. 

 V. Section 31 20 00, EARTH MOVING: Excavation and Backfill. 

1.3 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below shall form a part of this specification 
to the extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text 
by the basic designation only. 

B. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code - 

BPVC Section IX-2013....Welding, Brazing, and Fusing Qualifications 

B31.1-2012..............Power Piping 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A36/A36M-2012...........Standard Specification for Carbon Structural 
Steel 

A575-96(R2013)e1........Standard Specification for Steel Bars, Carbon, 
Merchant Quality, M-Grades 

E84-2013a...............Standard Test Method for Surface Burning 
Characteristics of Building Materials 

E119-2012a..............Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of 
Building Construction and Materials 

F1760-01(R2011).........Standard Specification for Coextruded 
Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Non-Pressure Plastic 
Pipe Having Reprocessed-Recycled Content 

D. International Code Council, (ICC): 

IBC-2012................International Building Code 

IPC-2012................International Plumbing Code 

E. Manufacturers Standardization Society (MSS) of the Valve and Fittings 
Industry, Inc: 


SP-58-2009..............Pipe Hangers and Supports - Materials, Design, 
Manufacture, Selection, Application and 
Installation 

SP-69-2003..............Pipe Hangers and Supports - Selection and 
Application 

F. Military Specifications (MIL): 

P-21035B................Paint High Zinc Dust Content, Galvanizing 
Repair (Metric) 

G. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA): 

MG 1-2011...............Motors and Generators 

H. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

51B-2014................Standard for Fire Prevention During Welding, 
Cutting and Other Hot Work 

54-2012.................National Fuel Gas Code 

70-2011.................National Electrical Code (NEC) 

I. NSF International (NSF): 

5-2012..................Water Heaters, Hot Water Supply Boilers, and 
Heat Recovery Equipment 

14-2012.................Plastic Piping System Components and Related 
Materials 

61-2012.................Drinking Water System Components – Health 
Effects 

372-2011................Drinking Water System Components – Lead Content 

J. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA): 

PG-18-10................Plumbing Design Manual 

PG-18-13-2011...........Barrier Free Design Guide 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submittals, including number of required copies, shall be submitted in 
accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, and 
SAMPLES. 

B. Information and material submitted under this section shall be marked 
"SUBMITTED UNDER SECTION 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING", 
with applicable paragraph identification. 

C. Contractor shall make all necessary field measurements and 
investigations to assure that the equipment and assemblies will meet 
contract requirements and will fit the space available. 

D. If equipment is submitted which differs in arrangement from that shown, 
provide drawings that show the rearrangement of all associated systems. 


Approval will be given only if all features of the equipment and 
associated systems, including accessibility, are equivalent to that 
required by the contract. 

E. Prior to submitting shop drawings for approval, contractor shall 
certify in writing that manufacturers of all major items of equipment 
have each reviewed drawings and specifications, and have jointly 
coordinated and properly integrated their equipment and controls to 
provide a complete and efficient installation. 

F. Installing Contractor shall provide lists of previous installations for 
selected items of equipment. Contact persons who will serve as 
references, with telephone numbers and e-mail addresses shall be 
submitted with the references. 

G. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: Manufacturer’s literature shall be 
submitted under the pertinent section rather than under this section. 

1. Electric motor data and variable speed drive data shall be submitted 
with the driven equipment. 

2. Equipment and materials identification. 

3. Firestopping materials. 

4. Hangers, inserts, supports and bracing. Provide load calculations 
for variable spring and constant support hangers. 

5. Wall, floor, and ceiling plates. 

H. Submittals and shop drawings for interdependent items, containing 
applicable descriptive information, shall be furnished together and 
complete in a group. Coordinate and properly integrate materials and 
equipment in each group to provide a completely compatible and 
efficient installation. Final review and approvals will be made only by 
groups. 

I. Coordination Drawings: Complete consolidated and coordinated layout 
drawings shall be submitted for all new systems, and for existing 
systems that are in the same areas. The drawings shall include plan 
views, elevations and sections of all systems and shall be on a scale 
of not less than 1:32 (3/8 inch equal to one foot). Clearly identify 
and dimension the proposed locations of the principal items of 
equipment. The drawings shall clearly show the proposed location and 
adequate clearance for all equipment, controls, piping, pumps, valves 
and other items. All valves, trap primer valves, water hammer 
arrestors, strainers, and equipment requiring service shall be provided 
with an access door sized for the complete removal of plumbing device, 


component, or equipment. Equipment foundations shall not be installed 
until equipment or piping layout drawings have been approved. Detailed 
layout drawings shall be provided for all piping systems. In addition, 
details of the following shall be provided. 

1. Mechanical equipment rooms. 

2. Interstitial space. 

3. Hangers, inserts, supports, and bracing. 

4. Pipe sleeves. 

5. Equipment penetrations of floors, walls, ceilings, or roofs. 

 

J. Maintenance Data and Operating Instructions: 

1. Maintenance and operating manuals in accordance with Section 01 00 
00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, Article, INSTRUCTIONS, for systems and 
equipment. Include complete list indicating all components of the 
systems with diagrams of the internal wiring for each item of 
equipment. 

2. Include listing of recommended replacement parts for keeping in 
stock supply, including sources of supply, for equipment shall be 
provided. The listing shall include belts for equipment: Belt 
manufacturer, model number, size and style, and distinguished 
whether of multiple belt sets. 

 K. Completed System Readiness Checklist provided by the Commissioning 
Agent and completed by the contractor, signed by a qualified technician 
and dated on the date of completion, in accordance with the 
requirements of Section 22 08 00 COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 

L. Submit training plans, trainer qualifications and instructor 
qualifications in accordance with the requirements of Section 22 08 00 
COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 

1.5 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Products Criteria: 

1. Standard Products: Material and equipment shall be the standard 
products of a manufacturer regularly engaged in the manufacture, 
supply and servicing of the specified products for at least 5 years. 
However, digital electronics devices, software and systems such as 
controls, instruments, computer work station, shall be the current 
generation of technology and basic design that has a proven 
satisfactory service record of at least 5 years. 


2. Equipment Service: There shall be permanent service organizations, 
authorized and trained by manufacturers of the equipment supplied, 
located within 160 km (100 miles) of the project. These 
organizations shall come to the site and provide acceptable service 
to restore operations within four hours of receipt of notification 
by phone, e-mail or fax in event of an emergency, such as the shutdown 
of equipment; or within 24 hours in a non-emergency. Names, 
mail and e-mail addresses and phone numbers of service organizations 
providing service under these conditions for (as applicable to the 
project): pumps, compressors, water heaters, critical 
instrumentation, computer workstation and programming shall be 
submitted for project record and inserted into the operations and 
maintenance manual. 

3. All items furnished shall be free from defects that would adversely 
affect the performance, maintainability and appearance of individual 
components and overall assembly. 

4. The products and execution of work specified in Division 22 shall 
conform to the referenced codes and standards as required by the 
specifications. Local codes and amendments enforced by the local 
code official shall be enforced, if required by local authorities 
such as the natural gas supplier. If the local codes are more 
stringent, then the local code shall apply. Any conflicts shall be 
brought to the attention of the Contracting Officers Representative 
(COR). 

5. Multiple Units: When two or more units of materials or equipment of 
the same type or class are required, these units shall be products 
of one manufacturer. 

6. Assembled Units: Manufacturers of equipment assemblies, which use 
components made by others, assume complete responsibility for the 
final assembled product. 

7. Nameplates: Nameplate bearing manufacturer's name or identifiable 
trademark shall be securely affixed in a conspicuous place on 
equipment, or name or trademark cast integrally with equipment, 
stamped or otherwise permanently marked on each item of equipment. 

8. Asbestos products or equipment or materials containing asbestos 
shall not be used. 

9. Bio-Based Materials: For products designated by the USDA’s Bio- 
Preferred Program, provide products that meet or exceed USDA 


recommendations for bio-based content, so long as products meet all 
performance requirements in this specifications section. For more 
information regarding the product categories covered by the Bio- 
Preferred Program, visit http://www.biopreferred.gov. 

B. Welding: Before any welding is performed, contractor shall submit a 
certificate certifying that welders comply with the following 
requirements: 

1. Qualify welding processes and operators for piping according to ASME 
"Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code", Section IX, "Welding and Brazing 
Qualifications". 

2. Comply with provisions of ASME B31 series "Code for Pressure 
Piping". 

3. Certify that each welder and welding operator has passed American 
Welding Society (AWS) qualification tests for the welding processes 
involved, and that certification is current. 

4. All welds shall be stamped according to the provisions of the 
American Welding Society. 

C. Manufacturer's Recommendations: Where installation procedures or any 
part thereof are required to be in accordance with the recommendations 
of the manufacturer of the material being installed, printed copies of 
these recommendations shall be furnished to the COR prior to 
installation. Installation of the item will not be allowed to proceed 
until the recommendations are received. Failure to furnish these 
recommendations can be cause for rejection of the material. 

D. Execution (Installation, Construction) Quality: 

1. All items shall be applied and installed in accordance with 
manufacturer's written instructions. Conflicts between the 
manufacturer's instructions and the contract documents shall be 
referred to the COR for resolution. Printed copies or electronic 
files of manufacturer’s installation instructions shall be provided 
to the COR at least 10 working days prior to commencing installation 
of any item. 

2. All items that require access, such as for operating, cleaning, 
servicing, maintenance, and calibration, shall be easily and safely 
accessible by persons standing at floor level, or standing on 
permanent platforms, without the use of portable ladders. Examples 
of these items include, but are not limited to: all types of valves, 
filters and strainers, transmitters, and control devices. Prior to 


commencing installation work, refer conflicts between this 
requirement and contract documents to COR for resolution. 

3. Complete layout drawings shall be required by Paragraph, SUBMITTALS. 
Construction work shall not start on any system until the layout 
drawings have been approved by VA. 

4. Installer Qualifications: Installer shall be licensed and shall 
provide evidence of the successful completion of at least five 
projects of equal or greater size and complexity. Provide tradesmen 
skilled in the appropriate trade. 

5. If an installation is unsatisfactory to the COR, the Contractor 
shall correct the installation at no additional cost or additional 
time to the Government. 

E. Guaranty: Warranty of Construction, FAR clause 52.246-21. 

F. Plumbing Systems: IPC, International Plumbing Code. Unless otherwise 
required herein, perform plumbing work in accordance with the latest 
version of the IPC. For IPC codes referenced in the contract documents, 
advisory provisions shall be considered mandatory, the word “should” 
shall be interpreted as “shall”. Reference to the “code official” or 
“owner” shall be interpreted to mean the COR. 

G. Cleanliness of Piping and Equipment Systems: 

1. Care shall be exercised in the storage and handling of equipment and 
piping material to be incorporated in the work. Debris arising from 
cutting, threading and welding of piping shall be removed. 

2. Piping systems shall be flushed, blown or pigged as necessary to 
deliver clean systems. 

3. The interior of all tanks shall be cleaned prior to delivery and 
beneficial use by the Government. All piping shall be tested in 
accordance with the specifications and the International Plumbing 
Code (IPC). All filters, strainers, fixture faucets shall be flushed 
of debris prior to final acceptance. 

4. Contractor shall be fully responsible for all costs, damage, and 
delay arising from failure to provide clean systems. 

1.6 DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 

A. Protection of Equipment: 

1. Equipment and material placed on the job site shall remain in the 
custody of the Contractor until phased acceptance, whether or not 
the Government has reimbursed the Contractor for the equipment and 


material. The Contractor is solely responsible for the protection of 
such equipment and material against any damage. 

2. Damaged equipment shall be replaced with an identical unit as 
determined and directed by the COR. Such replacement shall be at no 
additional cost or additional time to the Government. 

3. Interiors of new equipment and piping systems shall be protected 
against entry of foreign matter. Both inside and outside shall be 
cleaned before painting or placing equipment in operation. 

4. Existing equipment and piping being worked on by the Contractor 
shall be under the custody and responsibility of the Contractor and 
shall be protected as required for new work. 

1.7 AS-BUILT DOCUMENTATION 

A. Submit manufacturer’s literature and data updated to include submittal 
review comments and any equipment substitutions. 

B. Submit operation and maintenance data updated to include submittal 
review comments, substitutions and construction revisions shall be 
inserted into a three ring binder. All aspects of system operation and 
maintenance procedures, including piping isometrics, wiring diagrams of 
all circuits, a written description of system design, control logic, 
and sequence of operation shall be included in the operation and 
maintenance manual. The operations and maintenance manual shall include 
troubleshooting techniques and procedures for emergency situations. 
Notes on all special systems or devices such as damper and door closure 
interlocks shall be included. A List of recommended spare parts 
(manufacturer, model number, and quantity) shall be furnished. 
Information explaining any special knowledge or tools the owner will be 
required to employ shall be inserted into the As-Built documentation. 

C. The installing contractor shall maintain as-built drawings of each 
completed phase for verification; and, shall provide the complete set 
at the time of final systems certification testing. As-built drawings 
are to be provided, and a copy of them on Auto-Cad version //____// 
provided on compact disk or DVD. Should the installing contractor 
engage the testing company to provide as-built or any portion thereof, 
it shall not be deemed a conflict of interest or breach of the ‘third 
party testing company’ requirement. 

D. Certification documentation shall be provided prior to submitting the 
request for final inspection. The documentation shall include all test 
results, the names of individuals performing work for the testing 


agency on this project, detailed procedures followed for all tests, and 
a certification that all results of tests were within limits specified. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS FOR VARIOUS SERVICES 

 A. Steel pipe shall contain a minimum of 25 percent recycled content. 

B. Plastic pipe, fittings and solvent cement shall meet NSF 14 and shall 
bear the NSF seal “NSF-PW”. Polypropylene pipe and fittings shall 
comply with NSF 14 and NSF 61. Solder or flux containing lead shall not 
be used with copper pipe. 

C. Material or equipment containing a weighted average of greater than 
0.25 percent lead shall not be used in any potable water system 
intended for human consumption, and shall be certified in accordance 
with NSF 61 or NSF 372. 

D. In-line devices such as water meters, building valves, check valves, 
stops, valves, fittings, tanks and backflow preventers shall comply 
with NSF 61 and NSF 372. 

E. End point devices such as drinking fountains, lavatory faucets, kitchen 
and bar faucets, ice makers supply stops, and end-point control valves 
used to dispense drinking water must meet requirements of NSF 61 and 
NSF 372. 

2.2 FACTORY-ASSEMBLED PRODUCTS 

A. Standardization of components shall be maximized to reduce spare part 
requirements. 

B. Manufacturers of equipment assemblies that include components made by 
others shall assume complete responsibility for final assembled unit. 

1. All components of an assembled unit need not be products of same 
manufacturer. 

2. Constituent parts that are alike shall be products of a single 
manufacturer. 

3. Components shall be compatible with each other and with the total 
assembly for intended service. 

4. Contractor shall guarantee performance of assemblies of components, 
and shall repair or replace elements of the assemblies as required 
to deliver specified performance of the complete assembly at no 
additional cost or time to the Government. 

C. Components of equipment shall bear manufacturer's name and trademark, 
model number, serial number and performance data on a name plate 


securely affixed in a conspicuous place, or cast integral with, stamped 
or otherwise permanently marked upon the components of the equipment. 

D. Major items of equipment, which serve the same function, shall be the 
same make and model. 

2.3 COMPATIBILITY OF RELATED EQUIPMENT 

A. Equipment and materials installed shall be compatible in all respects 
with other items being furnished and with existing items so that the 
result will be a complete and fully operational system that conforms to 
contract requirements. 

2.4 LIFTING ATTACHMENTS 

A. Equipment shall be provided with suitable lifting attachments to enable 
equipment to be lifted in its normal position. Lifting attachments 
shall withstand any handling conditions that might be encountered, 
without bending or distortion of shape, such as rapid lowering and 
braking of load. 

2.5 CONTROL WIRING 

A. All material and equipment furnished and installation methods used 
shall conform to the requirements of Section 26 05 19, LOW-VOLTAGE 
ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLES. All electrical wiring, conduit, 
and devices necessary for the proper connection, protection and 
operation of the systems shall be provided. 

2.6 EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS IDENTIFICATION 

 A. Interior (Indoor) Equipment: Engraved nameplates, with letters not less 
than 7 mm (3/16 inch) high of brass with black-filled letters, or rigid 
black plastic with white letters specified in Section 09 91 00, 
PAINTING shall be permanently fastened to the equipment. Unit 
components such as water heaters, tanks, coils, filters, etc. shall be 
identified. 

B. Exterior (Outdoor) Equipment: Brass nameplates, with engraved black 
filled letters, not less than 7 mm (3/16 inch) high riveted or bolted 
to the equipment. 

C. Control Items: All temperature, pressure, and controllers shall be 
labeled and the component’s function identified. Identify and label 
each item as they appear on the control diagrams. 

D. Valve Tags and Lists: 

1. Plumbing: All valves shall be provided with valve tags and listed on 
a valve list (Fixture stops not included). 


2. Valve tags: Engraved black filled numbers and letters not less than 
15 mm (1/2 inch) high for number designation, and not less than 8 mm 
(1/4 inch) for service designation on 19 gage, 40 mm (1-1/2 inches) 
round brass disc, attached with brass "S" hook or brass chain. 

3. Valve lists: Valve lists shall be created using a word processing 
program and printed on plastic coated cards. The plastic coated 
valve list card(s), sized 215 mm (8-1/2 inches) by 275 mm (11 
inches) shall show valve tag number, valve function and area of 
control for each service or system. The valve list shall be in a 
punched 3-ring binder notebook. An additional copy of the valve list 
shall be mounted in picture frames for mounting to a wall. COR shall 
instruct contractor where frames shall be mounted. 

4. A detailed plan for each floor of the building indicating the 
location and valve number for each valve shall be provided in the 3- 
ring binder notebook. Each valve location shall be identified with a 
color coded sticker or thumb tack in ceiling or access door. 

2.7 FIRESTOPPING 

A. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING specifies an effective barrier against 
the spread of fire, smoke and gases where penetrations occur for 
piping. Refer to Section 22 07 11, PLUMBING INSULATION, for pipe 
insulation. 

2.8 GALVANIZED REPAIR COMPOUND 

A. Mil. Spec. DOD-P-21035B, paint. 

2.9 PIPE AND EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS AND RESTRAINTS 

A. In lieu of the paragraph which follows, suspended equipment support and 
restraints may be designed and installed in accordance with the 
International Building Code (IBC) and Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC 
RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS. Submittals based 
on the International Building Code (IBC) and Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC 
RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS requirements, or 
the following paragraphs of this Section shall be stamped and signed by 
a professional engineer registered in the state where the project is 
located. The Support system of suspended equipment over 227 kg (500 
pounds) shall be submitted for approval of the COR in all cases. See 
the above specifications for lateral force design requirements. 

B. Type Numbers Specified: For materials, design, manufacture, selection, 
application, and installation refer to MSS SP-58. For selection and 
application refer to MSS SP-69. Refer to Section 05 50 00, METAL 


FABRICATIONS, for miscellaneous metal support materials and prime coat 
painting. 

C. For Attachment to Concrete Construction: 

1. Concrete insert: Type 18, MSS SP-58. 

2. Self-drilling expansion shields and machine bolt expansion anchors: 
Permitted in concrete not less than 100 mm (4 inches) thick when 
approved by the COR for each job condition. 

3. Power-driven fasteners: Permitted in existing concrete or masonry 
not less than 100 mm (4 inches) thick when approved by the COR for 
each job condition. 

D. Hanger Rods: Hot-rolled steel, ASTM A36/A36M or ASTM A575 for allowable 
load listed in MSS SP-58. For piping, provide adjustment means for 
controlling level or slope. Types 13 or 15 turn-buckles shall provide 
40 mm (1-1/2 inches) minimum of adjustment and incorporate locknuts. 
All-thread rods are acceptable. 

E. Multiple (Trapeze) Hangers: Galvanized, cold formed, lipped steel 
channel horizontal member, not less than 43 mm by 43 mm (1-5/8 inches 
by 1-5/8 inches), 2.7 mm (No. 12 gage), designed to accept special 
spring held, hardened steel nuts. 

1. Allowable hanger load: Manufacturers rating less 91kg (200 pounds). 

2. Guide individual pipes on the horizontal member of every other 
trapeze hanger with 8 mm (1/4 inch) U-bolt fabricated from steel 
rod. Provide Type 40 insulation shield, secured by two 15 mm (1/2 
inch) galvanized steel bands, or insulated calcium silicate shield 
for insulated piping at each hanger. 

F. Pipe Hangers and Supports: (MSS SP-58), use hangers sized to encircle 
insulation on insulated piping. Refer to Section 22 07 11, PLUMBING 
INSULATION for insulation thickness. To protect insulation, provide 
Type 39 saddles for roller type supports or insulated calcium silicate 
shields. Provide Type 40 insulation shield or insulated calcium 
silicate shield at all other types of supports and hangers including 
those for insulated piping. 

1. General Types (MSS SP-58): 

a. Standard clevis hanger: Type 1; provide locknut. 

b. Riser clamps: Type 8. 

c. Wall brackets: Types 31, 32 or 33. 

d. Roller supports: Type 41, 43, 44 and 46. 

e. Saddle support: Type 36, 37 or 38. 


f. Turnbuckle: Types 13 or 15. 

g. U-bolt clamp: Type 24. 

h. Copper Tube: 

1) Hangers, clamps and other support material in contact with 
tubing shall be painted with copper colored epoxy paint, 
copper-coated, plastic coated or taped with isolation tape to 
prevent electrolysis. 

2) For vertical runs use epoxy painted, copper-coated or plastic 
coated riser clamps. 

3) For supporting tube to strut: Provide epoxy painted pipe 
straps for copper tube or plastic inserted vibration isolation 
clamps. 

4) Insulated Lines: Provide pre-insulated calcium silicate 
shields sized for copper tube. 

j. Spring hangers are required on all plumbing system pumps one 
horsepower and greater. 

2. Plumbing Piping (Other Than General Types): 

a. Horizontal piping: Type 1, 5, 7, 9, and 10. 

c. Hangers and supports in pipe chase: Prefabricated system ABS 
self-extinguishing material, not subject to electrolytic action, 
to hold piping, prevent vibration and compensate for all static 
and operational conditions. 

d. Blocking, stays and bracing: Angle iron or preformed metal 
channel shapes, 1.3 mm (18 gage) minimum. 

G. Pre-insulated Calcium Silicate Shields: 

1. Provide 360 degree water resistant high density 965 kPa (140 psig) 
compressive strength calcium silicate shields encased in galvanized 
metal. 

2. Pre-insulated calcium silicate shields to be installed at the point 
of support during erection. 

3. Shield thickness shall match the pipe insulation. 

4. The type of shield is selected by the temperature of the pipe, the 
load it must carry, and the type of support it will be used with. 

a. Shields for supporting cold water shall have insulation that 
extends a minimum of 25 mm (1 inch) past the sheet metal. 

b. The insulated calcium silicate shield shall support the maximum 
allowable water filled span as indicated in MSS SP-69. To support 
the load, the shields shall have one or more of the following 


features: structural inserts 4138 kPa (600 psig) compressive 
strength, an extra bottom metal shield, or formed structural 
steel (ASTM A36/A36M) wear plates welded to the bottom sheet 
metal jacket. 

5. Shields may be used on steel clevis hanger type supports, trapeze 
hangers, roller supports or flat surfaces. 

H. Seismic Restraint of Piping: Refer to Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC 
RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS. 

2.10 PIPE PENETRATIONS 

A. Pipe penetration sleeves shall be installed for all pipe other than 
rectangular blocked out floor openings for risers in mechanical bays. 

B. Pipe penetration sleeve materials shall comply with all firestopping 
requirements for each penetration. 

C. To prevent accidental liquid spills from passing to a lower level, 
provide the following: 

1. For sleeves: Extend sleeve 50 mm (2 inch) above finished floor and 
provide sealant for watertight joint. 

2. For blocked out floor openings: Provide 40 mm (1-1/2 inch) angle set 
in silicone adhesive around opening. 

3. For drilled penetrations: Provide 40 mm (1-1/2 inch) angle ring or 
square set in silicone adhesive around penetration. 

D. Penetrations are not allowed through beams or ribs, but may be 
installed in concrete beam flanges, with structural engineer prior 
approval. Any deviation from these requirements must receive prior 
approval of COR. 

E. Sheet metal, plastic, or moisture resistant fiber sleeves shall be 
provided for pipe passing through floors, interior walls, and 
partitions, unless brass or steel pipe sleeves are specifically called 
for below. 

F. Cast iron or zinc coated pipe sleeves shall be provided for pipe 
passing through exterior walls below grade. The space between the 
sleeve and pipe shall be made watertight with a modular or link rubber 
seal. The link seal shall be applied at both ends of the sleeve. 

G. Galvanized steel or an alternate black iron pipe with asphalt coating 
sleeves shall be for pipe passing through concrete beam flanges, except 
where brass pipe sleeves are called for. A galvanized steel sleeve 
shall be provided for pipe passing through floor of mechanical rooms, 


laundry work rooms, and animal rooms above basement. Except in 
mechanical rooms, sleeves shall be connected with a floor plate. 

H. Brass Pipe Sleeves shall be provided for pipe passing through quarry 
tile, terrazzo or ceramic tile floors. The sleeve shall be connected 
with a floor plate. 

I. Sleeve clearance through floors, walls, partitions, and beam flanges 
shall be 25 mm (1 inch) greater in diameter than external diameter of 
pipe. Sleeve for pipe with insulation shall be large enough to 
accommodate the insulation plus 25 mm (1 inch) in diameter. Interior 
openings shall be caulked tight with firestopping material and sealant 
to prevent the spread of fire, smoke, water and gases. 

J. Sealant and Adhesives: Shall be as specified in Section 07 92 00, JOINT 
SEALANTS. Bio-based materials shall be utilized when possible. 

K. Pipe passing through roof shall be installed through a 4.9 kg per 
square meter copper flashing with an integral skirt or flange. Skirt or 
flange shall extend not less than 200 mm (8 inches) from the pipe and 
set in a solid coating of bituminous cement. Extend flashing a minimum 
of 250 mm (10 inches) up the pipe. Pipe passing through a waterproofing 
membrane shall be provided with a clamping flange. The annular space 
between the sleeve and pipe shall be sealed watertight. 

2.11 TOOLS AND LUBRICANTS 

A. Furnish, and turn over to the COR, special tools not readily available 
commercially, that are required for disassembly or adjustment of 
equipment and machinery furnished. 

B. Grease Guns with Attachments for Applicable Fittings: One for each type 
of grease required for each motor or other equipment. 

C. Tool Containers: metal, permanently identified for intended service and 
mounted, or located, where directed by the COR. 

D. Lubricants: A minimum of 0.95 L (1 quart) of oil, and 0.45 kg (1 pound) 
of grease, of equipment manufacturer's recommended grade and type, in 
unopened containers and properly identified as to use for each 
different application. Bio-based materials shall be utilized when 
possible. 

2.12 WALL, FLOOR AND CEILING PLATES 

A. Material and Type: Chrome plated brass or chrome plated steel, one 
piece or split type with concealed hinge, with set screw for fastening 
to pipe, or sleeve. Use plates that fit tight around pipes, cover 
openings around pipes and cover the entire pipe sleeve projection. 


B. Thickness: Not less than 2.4 mm (3/32 inch) for floor plates. For wall 
and ceiling plates, not less than 0.64 mm (0.025 inch) for up to 75 mm 
(3 inch) pipe, 0.89 mm (0.035 inch) for larger pipe. 

C. Locations: Use where pipe penetrates floors, walls and ceilings in 
exposed locations, in finished areas only. Wall plates shall be used 
where insulation ends on exposed water supply pipe drop from overhead. 
A watertight joint shall be provided in spaces where brass or steel 
pipe sleeves are specified. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 ARRANGEMENT AND INSTALLATION OF EQUIPMENT AND PIPING 

A. Location of piping, sleeves, inserts, hangers, and equipment, access 
provisions shall be coordinated with the work of all trades. Piping, 
sleeves, inserts, hangers, and equipment shall be located clear of 
windows, doors, openings, light outlets, and other services and 
utilities. Equipment layout drawings shall be prepared to coordinate 
proper location and personnel access of all facilities. The drawings 
shall be submitted for review. 

B. Manufacturer's published recommendations shall be followed for 
installation methods not otherwise specified. 

C. Operating Personnel Access and Observation Provisions: All equipment 
and systems shall be arranged to provide clear view and easy access, 
without use of portable ladders, for maintenance, testing and operation 
of all devices including, but not limited to: all equipment items, 
valves, backflow preventers, filters, strainers, transmitters, sensors, 
meters and control devices. All gages and indicators shall be clearly 
visible by personnel standing on the floor or on permanent platforms. 
Maintenance and operating space and access provisions that are shown on 
the drawings shall not be changed nor reduced. 

D. Structural systems necessary for pipe and equipment support shall be 
coordinated to permit proper installation. 

E. Location of pipe sleeves, trenches and chases shall be accurately 
coordinated with equipment and piping locations. 

F. Cutting Holes: 

1. Holes shall be located to avoid interference with structural members 
such as beams or grade beams. Holes shall be laid out in advance and 
drilling done only after approval by COR. If the Contractor 
considers it necessary to drill through structural members, this 
matter shall be referred to COR for approval. 


2. Waterproof membrane shall not be penetrated. Pipe floor penetration 
block outs shall be provided outside the extents of the waterproof 
membrane. 

3. Holes through concrete and masonry shall be cut by rotary core 
drill. Pneumatic hammer, impact electric, and hand or manual hammer 
type drill will not be allowed, except as permitted by COR where 
working area space is limited. 

G. Interconnection of Pneumatic Instrumentation and Controls: Generally, 
pneumatic interconnections are not shown but must be provided. 

H. Minor Piping: Generally, small diameter pipe runs from drips and 
drains, water cooling, and other service are not shown but must be 
provided. 

I. Protection and Cleaning: 

1. Equipment and materials shall be carefully handled, properly stored, 
and adequately protected to prevent damage before and during 
installation, in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations 
and as approved by the COR. Damaged or defective items in the 
opinion of the COR, shall be replaced at no additional cost or time 
to the Government. 

2. Protect all finished parts of equipment, such as shafts and bearings 
where accessible, from rust prior to operation by means of 
protective grease coating and wrapping. Close pipe openings with 
caps or plugs during installation. Pipe openings, equipment, and 
plumbing fixtures shall be tightly covered against dirt or 
mechanical injury. At completion of all work thoroughly clean 
fixtures, exposed materials and equipment. 

J. Concrete and Grout: Concrete and shrink compensating grout 25 MPa (3000 
psig) minimum, specified in Section 03 30 00, CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE, 
shall be used for all pad or floor mounted equipment. 

K. Gages, thermometers, valves and other devices shall be installed with 
due regard for ease in reading or operating and maintaining said 
devices. Thermometers and gages shall be located and positioned to be 
easily read by operator or staff standing on floor or walkway provided. 
Servicing shall not require dismantling adjacent equipment or pipe 
work. 

L. Interconnection of Electrical Instrumentation and Controls: Electrical 
interconnection is generally not shown but shall be provided. This 
includes interconnections of sensors, transmitters, transducers, 


control devices, control and instrumentation panels, alarms, 
instruments and computer workstations. Comply with NFPA 70. 

M. Many plumbing systems interface with the HVAC control system. See the 
HVAC control points list and Section 23 09 23, DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL 
SYSTEM FOR HVAC. 

N. Work in Existing Building: 

1. Perform as specified in Article, OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS, 
Article, ALTERATIONS, and Article, RESTORATION of the Section 01 00 
00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS for relocation of existing equipment, 
alterations and restoration of existing building(s). 

2. As specified in Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, Article, 
OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS, make alterations to existing service 
piping at times that will cause the least interfere with normal 
operation of the facility. 

P. Work in bathrooms, restrooms, housekeeping closets: All pipe 
penetrations behind escutcheons shall be sealed with plumbers putty. 

Q. Switchgear Drip Protection: Every effort shall be made to eliminate the 
installation of pipe above data equipment, and electrical and telephone 
switchgear. If this is not possible, encase pipe in a second pipe with 
a minimum of joints. Drain valve shall be provided in low point of 
casement pipe. 

R. Inaccessible Equipment: 

1. Where the Government determines that the Contractor has installed 
equipment not conveniently accessible for operation and maintenance, 
equipment shall be removed and reinstalled or remedial action 
performed as directed at no additional cost or additional time to 
the Government. 

2. The term "conveniently accessible" is defined as capable of being 
reached without the use of ladders, or without climbing or crawling 
under or over obstacles such as electrical conduit, motors, fans, 
pumps, belt guards, transformers, high voltage lines, piping, and 
ductwork. 

3.2 TEMPORARY PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 

A. Continuity of operation of existing facilities may require temporary 
installation or relocation of equipment and piping. Temporary equipment 
or pipe installation or relocation shall be provided to maintain 
continuity of operation of existing facilities. 


B. The Contractor shall provide all required facilities in accordance with 
the requirements of phased construction and maintenance of service. All 
piping and equipment shall be properly supported, sloped to drain, 
operate without excessive stress, and shall be insulated where injury 
can occur to personnel by contact with operating facilities. The 
requirements of paragraph 3.1 shall apply. 

C. Temporary facilities and piping shall be completely removed back to the 
nearest active distribution branch or main pipe line and any openings 
in structures sealed. Dead legs are not allowed in potable water 
systems. Necessary blind flanges and caps shall be provided to seal 
open piping remaining in service. 

3.3 RIGGING 

A. Openings in building structures shall be planned to accommodate design 
scheme. 

B. Alternative methods of equipment delivery may be offered and will be 
considered by Government under specified restrictions of phasing and 
service requirements as well as structural integrity of the building. 

C. All openings in the building shall be closed when not required for 
rigging operations to maintain proper environment in the facility for 
Government operation and maintenance of service. 

D. Contractor shall provide all facilities required to deliver specified 
equipment and place on foundations. Attachments to structures for 
rigging purposes and support of equipment on structures shall be 
Contractor's full responsibility. 

E. Contractor shall check all clearances, weight limitations and shall 
provide a rigging plan designed by a Registered Professional Engineer. 
All modifications to structures, including reinforcement thereof, shall 
be at Contractor's cost, time and responsibility. 

F. Rigging plan and methods shall be referred to COR for evaluation prior 
to actual work. 

3.4 PIPE AND EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS 

A. Where hanger spacing does not correspond with joist or rib spacing, use 
structural steel channels secured directly to joist and rib structure 
that will correspond to the required hanger spacing, and then suspend 
the equipment and piping from the channels. Holes shall be drilled or 
burned in structural steel ONLY with the prior written approval of the 
COR. 


B. The use of chain pipe supports, wire or strap hangers; wood for 
blocking, stays and bracing, or hangers suspended from piping above 
shall not be permitted. Rusty products shall be replaced. 

C. Hanger rods shall be used that are straight and vertical. Turnbuckles 
for vertical adjustments may be omitted where limited space prevents 
use. A minimum of 15 mm (1/2 inch) clearance between pipe or piping 
covering and adjacent work shall be provided. 

D. For horizontal and vertical plumbing pipe supports, refer to the 
International Plumbing Code (IPC) and these specifications. 

E. Overhead Supports: 

1. The basic structural system of the building is designed to sustain 
the loads imposed by equipment and piping to be supported overhead. 

2. Provide steel structural members, in addition to those shown, of 
adequate capability to support the imposed loads, located in 
accordance with the final approved layout of equipment and piping. 

3. Tubing and capillary systems shall be supported in channel troughs. 

3.5 LUBRICATION 

A. All equipment and devices requiring lubrication shall be lubricated 
prior to initial operation. All devices and equipment shall be field 
checked for proper lubrication. 

B. All devices and equipment shall be equipped with required lubrication 
fittings. A minimum of one liter (one quart) of oil and 0.45 kg (1 
pound) of grease of manufacturer's recommended grade and type for each 
different application shall be provided. All materials shall be 
delivered to COR in unopened containers that are properly identified as 
to application. 

C. A separate grease gun with attachments for applicable fittings shall be 
provided for each type of grease applied. 

D. All lubrication points shall be accessible without disassembling 
equipment, except to remove access plates. 

E. All lubrication points shall be extended to one side of the equipment. 

3.6 PLUMBING SYSTEMS DEMOLITION 

A. Rigging access, other than indicated on the drawings, shall be provided 
after approval for structural integrity by the COR. Such access shall 
be provided without additional cost or time to the Government. Where 
work is in an operating plant, approved protection from dust and debris 
shall be provided at all times for the safety of plant personnel and 
maintenance of plant operation and environment of the plant. 


B. In an operating plant, cleanliness and safety shall be maintained. The 
plant shall be kept in an operating condition. Government personnel 
will be carrying on their normal duties of operating, cleaning and 
maintaining equipment and plant operation. Work shall be confined to 
the immediate area concerned; maintain cleanliness and wet down 
demolished materials to eliminate dust. Dust and debris shall not be 
permitted to accumulate in the area to the detriment of plant 
operation. All flame cutting shall be performed to maintain the fire 
safety integrity of this plant. Adequate fire extinguishing facilities 
shall be available at all times. All work shall be performed in 
accordance with recognized fire protection standards including NFPA 
51B. Inspections will be made by personnel of the VA Medical Center, 
and the Contractor shall follow all directives of the COR with regard 
to rigging, safety, fire safety, and maintenance of operations. 

C. Unless specified otherwise, all piping, wiring, conduit, and other 
devices associated with the equipment not re-used in the new work shall 
be completely removed from Government property per Section 01 74 19, 
CONSTRUCTION WASTE MANAGEMENT. This includes all concrete equipment 
pads, pipe, valves, fittings, insulation, and all hangers including the 
top connection and any fastenings to building structural systems. All 
openings shall be sealed after removal of equipment, pipes, ducts, and 
other penetrations in roof, walls, floors, in an approved manner and in 
accordance with plans and specifications where specifically covered. 
Structural integrity of the building system shall be maintained. 
Reference shall also be made to the drawings and specifications of the 
other disciplines in the project for additional facilities to be 
demolished or handled. 

D. All valves including gate, globe, ball, butterfly and check, all 
pressure gages and thermometers with wells shall remain Government 
property and shall be removed and delivered to COR and stored as 
directed. The Contractor shall remove all other material and equipment, 
devices and demolition debris under these plans and specifications. 
Such material shall be removed from Government property expeditiously 
and shall not be allowed to accumulate. Coordinate with the COR and 
Infection Control. 

3.7 CLEANING AND PAINTING 

A. Prior to final inspection and acceptance of the plant and facilities 
for beneficial use by the Government, the plant facilities, equipment 


and systems shall be thoroughly cleaned and painted. Refer to Section 
09 91 00, PAINTING. 

B. In addition, the following special conditions apply: 

1. Cleaning shall be thorough. Solvents, cleaning materials and methods 
recommended by the manufacturers shall be used for the specific 
tasks. All rust shall be removed prior to painting and from surfaces 
to remain unpainted. Scratches, scuffs, and abrasions shall be 
repaired prior to applying prime and finish coats. 

2. The following Material and Equipment shall NOT be painted: 

a. Motors, controllers, control switches, and safety switches. 

b. Control and interlock devices. 

c. Regulators. 

d. Pressure reducing valves. 

e. Control valves and thermostatic elements. 

f. Lubrication devices and grease fittings. 

g. Copper, brass, aluminum, stainless steel and bronze surfaces. 

h. Valve stems and rotating shafts. 

i. Pressure gages and thermometers. 

j. Glass. 

k. Name plates. 

3. Control and instrument panels shall be cleaned and damaged surfaces 
repaired. Touch-up painting shall be made with matching paint type 
and color obtained from manufacturer or computer matched. 

4. Pumps, motors, steel and cast iron bases, and coupling guards shall 
be cleaned, and shall be touched-up with the same paint type and 
color as utilized by the pump manufacturer. 

5. Temporary Facilities: Apply paint to surfaces that do not have 
existing finish coats per Section 09 91 00, Painting. 

 

6. The final result shall be a smooth, even-colored, even-textured 
factory finish on all items. The entire piece of equipment shall be 
repainted, if necessary, to achieve this. Lead based paints shall 
not be used. 

3.8 IDENTIFICATION SIGNS 

A. Laminated plastic signs, with engraved lettering not less than 7 mm 
(3/16 inch) high, shall be provided that designates equipment function, 
for all equipment, switches, motor controllers, relays, meters, control 
devices, including automatic control valves. Nomenclature and 


identification symbols shall correspond to that used in maintenance 
manual, and in diagrams specified elsewhere. Attach by chain, adhesive, 
or screws. 

B. Factory Built Equipment: Metal plate, securely attached, with name and 
address of manufacturer, serial number, model number, size, and 
performance data shall be placed on factory built equipment. 

C. Pipe Identification: Refer to Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

3.9 STARTUP AND TEMPORARY OPERATION 

A. Startup of equipment shall be performed as described in the equipment 
specifications. Vibration within specified tolerance shall be verified 
prior to extended operation. Temporary use of equipment is specified in 
Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, Article, TEMPORARY USE OF 
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT. 

 B. The commissioning Agent will observe startup and contractor testing of 
selected equipment. Coordinate the startup and contractor testing 
schedules with the Contracting Officer’s Representative and 
Commissioning Agent. Provide a minimum of 2 weeks prior notice. 

3.10 OPERATING AND PERFORMANCE TESTS 

A. Prior to the final inspection, all required tests shall be performed as 
specified in Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, Article, TESTS and 
submit the test reports and records to the COR. 

B. Should evidence of malfunction in any tested system, or piece of 
equipment or component part thereof, occur during or as a result of 
tests, make proper corrections, repairs or replacements, and repeat 
tests at no additional cost to the Government. 

C. When completion of certain work or systems occurs at a time when final 
control settings and adjustments cannot be properly made to make 
performance tests, then conduct such performance tests and finalize 
control settings during the first actual seasonal use of the respective 
systems following completion of work. Rescheduling of these tests shall 
be requested in writing to COR for approval. 

 D. Perform tests as required for commissioning provisions in accordance 
with Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS and Section 01 
91 00, GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. 

3.11 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE MANUALS 

A. All new and temporary equipment and all elements of each assembly shall 
be included. 


B. Data sheet on each device listing model, size, capacity, pressure, 
speed, horsepower, impeller size, and other information shall be 
included. 

C. Manufacturer’s installation, maintenance, repair, and operation 
instructions for each device shall be included. Assembly drawings and 
parts lists shall also be included. A summary of operating precautions 
and reasons for precautions shall be included in the Operations and 
Maintenance Manual. 

D. Lubrication instructions, type and quantity of lubricant shall be 
included. 

E. Schematic diagrams and wiring diagrams of all control systems corrected 
to include all field modifications shall be included. 

F. Set points of all interlock devices shall be listed. 

G. Trouble-shooting guide for the control system troubleshooting shall be 
inserted into the Operations and Maintenance Manual. 

H. The control system sequence of operation corrected with submittal 
review comments shall be inserted into the Operations and Maintenance 
Manual. 

I. Emergency procedures for shutdown and startup of equipment and systems. 

3.12 COMMISSIONING 

A. Provide commissioning documentation in accordance with the requirements 
of Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 

B. Components provided under this section of the specification will be 
tested as part of a larger system. 

3.13 DEMONSTRATION AND TRAINING 

A. Provide services of manufacturer’s technical representative for six 
hours to instruct VA Personnel in operation and maintenance of the 
system. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 22 05 23 

GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR PLUMBING PIPING 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section describes the requirements for general-duty valves for 
domestic water and sewer systems. 

B. A complete listing of all acronyms and abbreviations are included in 
Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

B. Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA AND SAMPLES. 

C. Section 01 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS. 

 D. Section 01 91 00, GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. 

E. Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING. 

 F. Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 

1.3 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

A112.14.1-2003..........Backwater Valves 

C. American Society of Sanitary Engineering (ASSE): 

1001-2008...............Performance Requirements for Atmospheric Type 
Vacuum Breakers 

1003-2009...............Performance Requirements for Water Pressure 
Reducing Valves for Domestic Water Distribution 
Systems 

1011-2004...............Performance Requirements for Hose Connection 
Vacuum Breakers 

1017-2009...............Performance Requirements for Temperature 
Actuated Mixing Valves for Hot Water 
Distribution Systems 

1020-2004...............Performance Requirements for Pressure Vacuum 
Breaker Assembly 

1035-2008...............Performance Requirements for Laboratory Faucet 
Backflow Preventers 

1069-2005...............Performance Requirements for Automatic 
Temperature Control Mixing Valves 


1070-2004...............Performance Requirements for Water Temperature 
Limiting Devices 

1071-2012...............Performance Requirements for Temperature 
Actuated Mixing Valves for Plumbed Emergency 
Equipment 

D. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A126-2004(R2009)........Standard Specification for Gray Iron Castings 
for Valves, Flanges, and Pipe Fittings 

A276-2013a..............Standard Specification for Stainless Steel Bars 
and Shapes 

A536-1984(R2009)........Standard Specification for Ductile Iron 
Castings 

B62-2009................Standard Specification for Composition Bronze 
or Ounce Metal Castings 

B584-2013...............Standard Specification for Copper Alloy Sand 
Castings for General Applications 

E. International Code Council (ICC): 

IPC-2012................International Plumbing Code 

F. Manufacturers Standardization Society of the Valve and Fittings 
Industry, Inc. (MSS): 

SP-25-2008..............Standard Marking Systems for Valves, Fittings, 
Flanges and Unions 

SP-67-2011..............Butterfly Valves 

SP-70-2011..............Gray Iron Gate Valves, Flanged and Threaded 
Ends 

SP-71-2011..............Gray Iron Swing Check Valves, Flanged and 
Threaded Ends 

SP-80-2013..............Bronze Gate, Globe, Angle, and Check Valves 

SP-85-2011..............Gray Iron Globe & Angle Valves, Flanged and 
Threaded Ends 

SP-110-2010.............Ball Valves Threaded, Socket-Welding, Solder 
Joint, Grooved and Flared Ends 

G. National Environmental Balancing Bureau (NEBB): 

7th Edition 2005 Procedural Standards for Testing, Adjusting, 
Balancing of Environmental Systems 

H. NSF International (NSF): 

61-2012.................Drinking Water System Components – Health 
Effects 


372-2011................Drinking Water System Components – Lead Content 

I. University of Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection 
Control and Hydraulic Research (USC FCCCHR): 

9th Edition.............Manual of Cross-Connection Control 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submittals, including number of required copies, shall be submitted in 
accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, and 
SAMPLES. 

B. Information and material submitted under this section shall be marked 
“SUBMITTED UNDER SECTION 22 05 23, GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR PLUMBING 
PIPING”, with applicable paragraph identification. 

C. Manufacturer's Literature and Data Including: Full item description and 
optional features and accessories. Include dimensions, weights, 
materials, applications, standard compliance, model numbers, size, and 
capacity. 

1. Ball Valves. 

2. Gate Valves. 

3. Butterfly Valves. 

4. Balancing Valves. 

5. Check Valves. 

6. Globe Valves. 

D. Test and Balance reports for balancing valves. 

E. Complete operating and maintenance manuals including wiring diagrams, 
technical data sheets and information for ordering replaceable parts: 

1. Include complete list indicating all components of the systems. 

2. Include complete diagrams of the internal wiring for each item of 
equipment. 

3. Diagrams shall have their terminals identified to facilitate 
installation, operation and maintenance. 

4. Piping diagrams of thermostatic mixing valves to be installed. 

 F. Completed System Readiness Checklist provided by the Commissioning 
Agent and completed by the Contractor, signed by a qualified technician 
and dated on the date of completion, in accordance with the 
requirements of Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 

G. Submit training plans and instructor qualifications in accordance with 
the requirements of Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING 
SYSTEMS. 


1.5 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING 

A. Valves shall be prepared for shipping as follows: 

1. Protect internal parts against rust and corrosion. 

2. Protect threads, flange faces, grooves, and weld ends. 

3. Set angle, gate, and globe valves closed to prevent rattling. 

4. Set ball and plug valves open to minimize exposure of functional 
surfaces. 

5. Set butterfly valves closed or slightly open. 

6. Block check valves in either closed or open position. 

B. Valves shall be prepared for storage as follows: 

1. Maintain valve end protection. 

2. Store valves indoors and maintain at higher than ambient dew point 
temperature. 

C. A sling shall be used for large valves. The sling shall be rigged to 
avoid damage to exposed parts. Hand wheels or stems shall not be used 
as lifting or rigging points. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 VALVES, GENERAL 

A. Asbestos packing and gaskets are prohibited. 

B. Bronze valves shall be made with dezincification resistant materials. 
Bronze valves made with copper alloy (brass) containing more than 15 
percent zinc shall not be permitted. 

C. Valves in insulated piping shall have 50 mm or DN50 (2 inch) stem 
extensions and extended handles of non-thermal conductive material that 
allows operating the valve without breaking the vapor seal or 
disturbing the insulation. Memory stops shall be fully adjustable after 
insulation is applied. 

D. Exposed Valves over 65 mm or DN65 (2-1/2 inches) installed at an 
elevation over 3.6 m (12 feet) shall have a chain-wheel attachment to 
valve hand-wheel, stem, or other actuator. 

E. All valves used to supply potable water shall meet the requirements of 
NSF 61 and NSF 372. 

2.2 SHUT-OFF VALVES 

A. Cold, Hot and Re-circulating Hot Water: 

1. 50 mm or DN50 (2 inches) and smaller: Ball, MSS SP-110, Ball valve 
shall be full port three piece or two piece with a union design with 
adjustable stem package. Threaded stem designs are not allowed. The 
ball valve shall have a SWP rating of 1035 kPa (150 psig) and a CWP 


rating of 4138 kPa (600 psig). The body material shall be Bronze 
ASTM B584, Alloy C844. The ends shall be non-lead solder. 

2. Less than 100 mm DN100 (4 inches): Butterfly shall have an iron body 
with EPDM seal and aluminum bronze disc. The butterfly valve shall 
meet MSS SP-67, type I standard. The butterfly valve shall have a 
SWP rating of 1380 kPa (200 psig). The valve design shall be lug 
type suitable for bidirectional dead-end service at rated pressure. 
The body material shall meet ASTM A536, ductile iron. 

3. 100 mm DN100 (4 inches) and larger: 

a. Class 125, OS&Y, Cast Iron Gate Valve. The gate valve shall meet 
MSS SP-70 type I standard. The gate valve shall have a CWP rating 
of 1380 kPa (200 psig). The valve materials shall meet ASTM A126, 
grey iron with bolted bonnet, flanged ends, bronze trim, and 
positive-seal resilient solid wedge disc. The gate valve shall be 
gear operated for sizes under 200 mm or DN200 (8 inches) and 
crank operated for sizes 200 mm or DN200 (8 inches) and above. 

b. Single flange, ductile iron butterfly valves: The single flanged 
butterfly valve shall meet the MSS SP-67 standard. The butterfly 
valve shall have a CWP rating of 1380 kPa (200 psig). The 
butterfly valve shall be lug type, suitable for bidirectional 
dead-end service at rated pressure without use of downstream 
flange. The body material shall comply with ASTM A536 ductile 
iron. The seat shall be EPDM with stainless steel disc and stem. 

c. Grooved end, ductile iron butterfly valves. The grooved butterfly 
valve shall meet the MSS SP-67 standard. The grooved butterfly 
valve shall have a CWP rating of 1380 kPa (200 psig). The valve 
materials shall be epoxy coated ductile iron conforming to ASTM 
A536 with two piece stainless steel stem, //Buna-N//EPDM// 
encapsulated ductile iron disc, and EPDM seal. The butterfly 
valve shall be gear operated. 

B. Reagent Grade Water: Valves for reagent grade, reverse osmosis, or 
deionized water service shall be ball type of same material as used for 
pipe. 

2.3 BALANCING VALVES 

A. Hot Water Re-circulating, 75 mm or DN75 (3 inches) and smaller manual 
balancing valve shall be of bronze body, brass ball construction with 
glass and carbon filled TFE seat rings and designed for positive 
shutoff. The manual balancing valve shall have differential pressure 


read-out ports across the valve seat area. The read out ports shall be 
fitting with internal EPT inserts and check valves. The valve body 
shall have 8 mm or DN8 NPT (1/4 inch NPT) tapped drain and purge port. 
The valves shall have memory stops that allow the valve to close for 
service and then reopened to set point without disturbing the balance 
position. All valves shall have calibrated nameplates to assure 
specific valve settings. 

B. Larger than 75 mm or DN75 (3 inches): Manual balancing valves shall be 
of heavy duty cast iron flanged construction with 861 kPa (125 psig) 
flange connections. The flanged manual balancing valves shall have 
either a brass ball with glass and carbon filled TFE seal rings or 
fitted with a bronze seat, replaceable bronze disc with EPDM seal 
insert and stainless steel stem. The design pressure shall be 1200 kPa 
(175 psig) at 121 degrees C (250 degrees F). 

2.4 CHECK VALVES 

A. 75 mm or DN75 (3 inches) and smaller shall be Class 125, bronze swing 
check valves with non-metallic disc suitable for type of service. The 
check valve shall meet MSS SP-80 Type 4 standard. The check valve shall 
have a CWP rating of 1380 kPa (200 psig). The check valve shall have a 
Y pattern horizontal body design with bronze body material conforming 
to ASTM B62, solder joints, and PTFE or TFE disc. 

B. 100 mm or DN100 (4 inches) and larger: 

1. Check valves shall be Class 125, iron swing check valve with lever 
and weight closure control. The check valve shall meet MSS SP-71 
Type I standard. The check valve shall have a CWP rating of 1380 kPa 
(200 psig). The check valve shall have a clear or full waterway body 
design with gray iron body material conforming to ASTM A126, bolted 
bonnet, flanged ends, bronze trim. 

2. All check valves on the discharge side of submersible sump pumps 
shall have factory installed exterior level and weight with 
sufficient weight to prevent the check valve from hammering against 
the seat when the sump pump stops. 

2.5 GLOBE VALVES 

A. 75 mm or DN75 (3 inches) or smaller: Class 150, bronze globe valve with 
non-metallic disc. The globe valve shall meet MSS SP-80, Type 2 
standard. The globe valve shall have a CWP rating of 2070 kPa (300 
psig). The valve material shall be bronze with integral seal and union 


ring bonnet conforming to ASTM B62 with solder ends, copper-silicon 
bronze stem, PTFE or TFE disc, and malleable iron hand wheel. 

B. Larger than 75 mm or DN75 (3 inches): Similar to above, except with 
cast iron body and bronze trim, Class 125, iron globe valve. The globe 
valve shall meet MSS SP-85, Type 1 standard. The globe valve shall have 
a CWP rating of 1380 kPa (200 psig). The valve material shall be gray 
iron with bolted bonnet conforming to ASTM A126 with flanged ends, 
bronze trim, and malleable iron handwheel. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 EXAMINATION 

A. Valve interior shall be examined for cleanliness, freedom from foreign 
matter, and corrosion. Special packing materials shall be removed, such 
as blocks, used to prevent disc movement during shipping and handling. 

B. Valves shall be operated in positions from fully open to fully closed. 
Guides and seats shall be examined and made accessible by such 
operations. 

C. Threads on valve and mating pipe shall be examined for form and 
cleanliness. 

D. Mating flange faces shall be examined for conditions that might cause 
leakage. Bolting shall be checked for proper size, length, and 
material. Gaskets shall be verified for proper size and that its 
material composition is suitable for service and free from defects and 
damage. 

E. Do not attempt to repair defective valves; replace with new valves. 

3.2 INSTALLATION 

A. Install valves with unions or flanges at each piece of equipment 
arranged to allow service, maintenance, and equipment removal without 
system shutdown. 

B. Valves shall be located for easy access and shall be provide with 
separate support. Valves shall be accessible with access doors when 
installed inside partitions or above hard ceilings. 

C. Valves shall be installed in horizontal piping with stem at or above 
center of pipe. 

D. Valves shall be installed in a position to allow full stem movement. 

E. Install chain wheels on operators for //ball// //butterfly// //gate// 
and //globe// valves NPS 100 mm or DN100 (4 inches) and larger and more 
than 3.6 m (12 feet) above floor. Chains shall be extended to 1524 mm 
(60 inches) above finished floor. 


F. Check valves shall be installed for proper direction of flow and as 
follows: 

1. Swing Check Valves: In horizontal position with hinge pin level and 
on top of valve. 

G. Install backflow preventers in each water supply to mechanical 
equipment and systems and to other equipment and water systems that may 
be sources of contamination. Comply with authorities having 
jurisdiction. Locate backflow preventers in same room as connected 
equipment or system. 

1. Install drain for backflow preventers with atmospheric-vent drain 
connection with air-gap fitting, fixed air-gap fitting, or 
equivalent positive pipe separation of at least two pipe diameters 
in drain piping and pipe to floor drain. Locate air-gap device 
attached to or under backflow preventer. Simple air breaks are not 
acceptable for this application. 

H. Install pressure gages on outlet of backflow preventers. 

I. Do not install bypass piping around backflow preventers. 

J. Install temperature-actuated water mixing valves with check stops or 
shutoff valves on inlets. 

1. Install thermometers if specified. 

2. Install cabinet-type units recessed in or surface mounted on wall as 
specified. 

K. If an installation is unsatisfactory to the COR, the Contractor shall 
correct the installation at no cost to the Government. 

3.3 LABELING AND IDENTIFYING 

A. Equipment Nameplates and Signs: Install engraved plastic-laminate 
equipment nameplate or sign on or near each of the following: 

1. Calibrated balancing valves. 

B. Distinguish among multiple units, inform operator of operational 
requirements, indicate safety and emergency precautions, and warn of 
hazards and improper operations, in addition to identifying unit. 

3.4 ADJUSTING 

A. Valve packing shall be adjusted or replaced after piping systems have 
been tested and put into service but before final adjusting and 
balancing. Valves shall be replaced if persistent leaking occurs. 

B. Set field-adjustable flow set points of balancing valves and record 
data. Ensure recorded data represents actual measured or observed 
conditions. Permanently mark settings of valves and other adjustment 


devices allowing settings to be restored. Set and lock memory stops. 
After adjustment, take measurements to verify balance has not been 
disrupted or that such disruption has been rectified. 

C. Testing and adjusting of balancing valves shall be performed by an 
independent NEBB Accredited Test and Balance Contractor. A final 
settings and flow report shall be submitted to the VA Contracting 
Officer’s Representative (COR). 

3.5 COMMISSIONING 

A. Provide commissioning documentation in accordance with the requirements 
of Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 

B. Components provided under this section of the specification will be 
tested as part of a larger system. 

3.6 DEMONSTRATION AND TRAINING 

A. Provide services of manufacturer’s technical representative for four 
hours to instruct VA Personnel in operation and maintenance of the 
system. 

- - E N D - - - 


SECTION 22 07 11 
PLUMBING INSULATION 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Field applied insulation for thermal efficiency and condensation 
control for 

1. Plumbing piping and equipment. 

B. Definitions 

1. ASJ: All service jacket, white finish facing or jacket. 

2. Air conditioned space: Space having air temperature and/or humidity 
controlled by mechanical equipment. 

3. Cold: Equipment or piping handling media at design temperature of 16 
degrees C (60 degrees F) or below. 

4. Concealed: Piping above ceilings and in chases, interstitial space, 
and pipe spaces. 

5. Exposed: Piping and equipment exposed to view in finished areas 
including mechanical equipment rooms or exposed to outdoor weather. 
Shafts, chases, interstitial spaces, unfinished attics, crawl spaces 
and pipe basements are not considered finished areas. 

6. Hot: Plumbing equipment or piping handling media above 41 degrees C 
(105 degrees F). 

7. Density: kg/m3 - kilograms per cubic meter (Pcf - pounds per cubic 
foot). 

8. Thermal conductance: Heat flow rate through materials. 

a. Flat surface: Watts per square meter (BTU per hour per square 
foot). 

b. Pipe or Cylinder: Watts per square meter (BTU per hour per linear 
foot). 

9. Thermal Conductivity (k): Watt per meter, per degree C (BTU per inch 
thickness, per hour, per square foot, per degree F temperature 
difference). 

 10. Vapor Retarder (Vapor Barrier): A material which retards the 

 transmission (migration) of water vapor. Performance of the vapor 

 retarder is rated in terms of permeance (perms). For the purpose of 

 this specification, vapor retarders shall have a maximum published 

 permeance of 0.1 perms and vapor barriers shall have a maximum 

 published permeance of 0.001 perms. 

11. R: Pump recirculation. 


12. CW: Cold water. 

13. HW: Hot water. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING: Mineral fiber and bond breaker behind 
sealant. 

B. Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING: General mechanical 
requirements and items, which are common to more than one section of 
Division 22. 

C. Section 22 05 19, METERS AND GAGES FOR PLUMBING PIPING and Section 22 
05 23, GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR PLUMBING PIPING: Hot and cold water 
piping. 

D. Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. Requirements for 
commissioning, systems readiness checklists, and training. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Refer to article QUALITY ASSURANCE, in Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK 
RESULTS FOR PLUMBING. 

B. Criteria: 

1. Comply with NFPA 90A, particularly paragraphs 4.3.3.1 through 
4.3.3.6, 4.3.10.2.6, and 5.4.6.4, parts of which are quoted as 
follows: 

4.3.3.1 Pipe insulation and coverings, vapor retarder facings, 
adhesives, fasteners, tapes, unless otherwise provided for 
in 4.3.3.1.12 or 4.3.3.1.2, shall have, in the form in which 
they are used, a maximum flame spread index of 25 without 
evidence of continued progressive combustion and a maximum smoke 
developed index of 50 when tested in accordance with NFPA 255, 
Standard Method of Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of 
Building Materials. 

4.3.3.1.1 Where these products are to be applied with adhesives, 
they shall be tested with such adhesives applied, or the 
adhesives used shall have a maximum flame spread index of 25 and 
a maximum smoke developed index of 50 when in the final dry 
state. (See 4.2.4.2.) 

4.3.3.3 Pipe insulation and coverings shall not flame, glow, 
smolder, or smoke when tested in accordance with a similar test 
for pipe covering, ASTM C 411, Standard Test Method for Hot- 
Surface Performance of High-Temperature Thermal Insulation, at 
the temperature to which they are exposed in service. 

4.3.3.3.1 In no case shall the test temperature be below 121°C 
(250°F). 

4.3.10.2.6.3 Nonferrous fire sprinkler piping shall be listed as 
having a maximum peak optical density of 0.5 or less, an average 
optical density of 0.15 or less, and a maximum flame spread 
distance of 1.5 m (5 ft) or less when tested in accordance with 


UL 1887, Standard for Safety Fire Test of Plastic Sprinkler Pipe 
for Visible Flame and Smoke Characteristics. 

4.3.10.2.6.7 Smoke detectors shall not be required to meet the 
provisions of this section. 

2. Test methods: ASTM E84, UL 723, or NFPA 255. 

3. Specified k factors are at 24 degrees C (75 degrees F) mean 
temperature unless stated otherwise. Where optional thermal 
insulation material is used, select thickness to provide thermal 
conductance no greater than that for the specified material. For 
pipe, use insulation manufacturer's published heat flow tables. For 
domestic hot water supply and return, run out insulation and 
condensation control insulation, no thickness adjustment need be 
made. 

4. All materials shall be compatible and suitable for service 
temperature, and shall not contribute to corrosion or otherwise 
attack surface to which applied in either the wet or dry state. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings: 

1. All information, clearly presented, shall be included to determine 
compliance with drawings and specifications and ASTM, federal and 
military specifications. 

a. Insulation materials: Specify each type used and state surface 
burning characteristics. 

b. Insulation facings and jackets: Each type used. 

c. Insulation accessory materials: Each type used. 

d. Manufacturer's installation and fitting fabrication instructions 
for flexible unicellular insulation. 

e. Make reference to applicable specification paragraph numbers for 
coordination. 

1.5 STORAGE AND HANDLING OF MATERIAL 

 Store materials in clean and dry environment, pipe covering jackets 
shall be clean and unmarred. Place adhesives in original containers. 
Maintain ambient temperatures and conditions as required by printed 
instructions of manufacturers of adhesives, mastics and finishing 
cements. 


1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by basic 
designation only. 

B. Federal Specifications (Fed. Spec.): 

L-P-535E (2)-91.........Plastic Sheet (Sheeting): Plastic Strip; Poly 
(Vinyl Chloride) and Poly (Vinyl Chloride - 
Vinyl Acetate), Rigid. 

C. Military Specifications (Mil. Spec.): 

MIL-A-3316C (2)-90......Adhesives, Fire-Resistant, Thermal Insulation 

MIL-A-24179A (1)-87.....Adhesive, Flexible Unicellular-Plastic 
Thermal Insulation 

MIL-C-19565C (1)-88.....Coating Compounds, Thermal Insulation, Fire-and 
Water-Resistant, Vapor-Barrier 

MIL-C-20079H-87.........Cloth, Glass; Tape, Textile Glass; and Thread, 
Glass and Wire-Reinforced Glass 

D. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-04 ................Standard Specification for Stainless and 
Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel Steel Plate, 
Sheet, and Strip 

B209-07.................Standard Specification for Aluminum and 
Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate 

C411-05.................Standard test method for Hot-Surface 
Performance of High-Temperature Thermal 
Insulation 

C449-07.................Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber 
Hydraulic-Setting Thermal Insulating and 
Finishing Cement 

C533-09.................Standard Specification for Calcium Silicate 
Block and Pipe Thermal Insulation 

C534-08 ................Standard Specification for Preformed Flexible 
Elastomeric Cellular Thermal Insulation in 
Sheet and Tubular Form 

C547-07 ................Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber pipe 
Insulation 

C552-07 ................Standard Specification for Cellular Glass 
Thermal Insulation 


C553-08 ................Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber 
Blanket Thermal Insulation for Commercial and 
Industrial Applications 

C585-09.................Standard Practice for Inner and Outer Diameters 
of Rigid Thermal Insulation for Nominal Sizes 
of Pipe and Tubing (NPS System) R (1998) 

C612-10 ................Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Block 
and Board Thermal Insulation 

C1126-10................Standard Specification for Faced or Unfaced 
Rigid Cellular Phenolic Thermal Insulation 

C1136-10 ...............Standard Specification for Flexible, Low 
Permeance Vapor Retarders for Thermal 
Insulation 

D1668-97a (2006)........Standard Specification for Glass Fabrics (Woven 
and Treated) for Roofing and Waterproofing 

E84-10 .................Standard Test Method for Surface Burning 
Characteristics of Building 

Materials 

E119-09C................Standard Test Method for Fire Tests of Building 
Construction and Materials 

E136-09 b...............Standard Test Methods for Behavior of Materials 
in a Vertical Tube Furnace at 750 degrees C 
(1380 F) 

E. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

101-09 .................Life Safety Code 

251-06..................Standard methods of Tests of Fire Endurance of 
Building Construction Materials 

255-06..................Standard Method of tests of Surface Burning 
Characteristics of Building Materials 

 

 

F. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc (UL): 

723.....................UL Standard for Safety Test for Surface Burning 
Characteristics of Building Materials with 
Revision of 08/03 

G. Manufacturer’s Standardization Society of the Valve and Fitting 
Industry (MSS): 


SP58-2002...............Pipe Hangers and Supports Materials, Design, 
and Manufacture 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

 

2.1 MINERAL FIBER OR FIBER GLASS 

A. ASTM C612 (Board, Block), Class 1 or 2, density 48 kg/m3 (3 pcf), k = 
0.037 (.26) at 24 degrees C (75 degrees F), external insulation for 
temperatures up to 204 degrees C (400 degrees F). 

B. ASTM C553 (Blanket, Flexible) Type I, Class B-3, Density 16 kg/m3 (1 
pcf), k = 0.045 (0.31) at 24 degrees C (75 degrees F), for use at 
temperatures up to 204 degrees C (400 degrees F) 

C. ASTM C547 (Pipe Fitting Insulation and Preformed Pipe Insulation), 

 Class 1, k = 0.037 (0.26) at 24 degrees C (75 degrees F), for use at 

temperatures up to 230 degrees C (450 degrees F)with an all service 

vapor retarder jacket with polyvinyl chloride premolded fitting 

covering. 

2.2 FLEXIBLE ELASTOMERIC CELLULAR THERMAL 

 ASTM C177, C518, k = 0.039 (0.27) at 24 degrees C (75 degrees F), flame 
spread not over 25, smoke developed not over 50, for temperatures from 
minus 4 degrees C (40 degrees F) to 93 degrees C (200 degrees F). No 
jacket required. 

2.3 INSULATION FACINGS AND JACKETS 

A. Vapor Retarder, higher strength with low water permeance = 0.02 or less 
perm rating, Beach puncture 50 units for insulation facing on pipe 
insulation jackets. Facings and jackets shall be all service type (ASJ) 
or PVDC Vapor Retarder jacketing. 

B. ASJ jacket shall be white kraft bonded to 0.025 mm (1 mil) thick 
aluminum foil, fiberglass reinforced, with pressure sensitive adhesive 
closure. Comply with ASTM C1136. Beach puncture 50 units, Suitable for 
painting without sizing. Jackets shall have minimum 40 mm (1-1/2 inch) 
lap on longitudinal joints and minimum 75mm (3 inch) butt strip on end 
joints. Butt strip material shall be same as the jacket. Lap and butt 
strips shall be self-sealing type with factory-applied pressure 
sensitive adhesive. 

C. Vapor Retarder medium strength with low water vapor permeance of 0.02 
or less perm rating), Beach puncture 25 units: Foil-Scrim-Kraft (FSK) 
or PVDC vapor retarder jacketing type for concealed ductwork and 
equipment. 


 

 

D. Field applied vapor barrier jackets shall be provided, in addition to 
the specified facings and jackets, on all exterior piping as well as on 
interior piping exposed to outdoor air (i.e.; in ventilated attics, 
piping in ventilated (not air conditioned) spaces, etc.)in high 
humidity areas conveying fluids below ambient temperature. The vapor 
barrier jacket shall consist of a multi-layer laminated cladding with a 
maximum water vapor permeance of 0.001 perms. The minimum puncture 
resistance shall be 35 cm-kg (30 inch-pounds) for interior locations 
and 92 cm-kg (80 inch-pounds) for exterior or exposed locations or 
where the insulation is subject to damage. 

E. Factory composite materials may be used provided 

F. Pipe fitting insulation covering (jackets): Fitting covering shall be 
premolded to match shape of fitting and shall be polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) conforming to Fed Spec L-P-335, composition A, Type II Grade GU, 
and Type III, minimum thickness 0.7 mm (0.03 inches). Provide color 
matching vapor retarder pressure sensitive tape. 

G. Aluminum Jacket-Piping systems and circular breeching and stacks: ASTM 
B209, 3003 alloy, H-14 temper, 0.6 mm (0.023 inch) minimum thickness 
with locking longitudinal joints. Jackets for elbows, tees and other 
fittings shall be factory-fabricated to match shape of fitting and of 
0.6 mm (0.024) inch minimum thickness aluminum. Fittings shall be of 
same construction as straight run jackets but need not be of the same 
alloy. Factory-fabricated stainless steel bands shall be installed on 
all circumferential joints. Bands shall be 13 mm (0.5 inch) wide on 450 
mm (18 inch) centers. System shall be weatherproof if utilized for 
outside service. 

2.4 PIPE COVERING PROTECTION SADDLES 

A. Cold pipe support: Premolded pipe insulation 180 degrees (half-shells) 
on bottom half of pipe at supports. Material shall be cellular glass or 
high density Polyisocyanurate insulation of the same thickness as 
adjacent insulation. Density of Polyisocyanurate insulation shall be a 
minimum of 48 kg/m3 (3.0 pcf). 

Nominal Pipe Size and Accessories Material (Insert Blocks) 

Nominal Pipe Size mm (inches) 

Insert Blocks mm (inches) 

Up through 125 (5) 

150 (6) long 




Nominal Pipe Size and Accessories Material (Insert Blocks) 



Nominal Pipe Size mm (inches) 

Insert Blocks mm (inches) 

150 (6) 

150 (6) long 

200 (8), 250 (10), 300 (12) 

225 (9) long 

350 (14), 400 (16) 

300 (12) long 

450 through 600 (18 through 24) 

350 (14) long 



 

B. Warm or hot pipe supports: Premolded pipe insulation (180 degree halfshells) 
on bottom half of pipe at supports. Material shall be high 
density Polyisocyanurate (for temperatures up to 149 degrees C [300 
degrees F]), cellular glass or calcium silicate. Insulation at 
supports shall have same thickness as adjacent insulation. Density of 
Polyisocyanurate insulation shall be a minimum of 48 kg/m3 (3.0 pcf). 

2.5 ADHESIVE, MASTIC, CEMENT 

A. Mil. Spec. MIL-A-3316, Class 1: Jacket and lap adhesive and protective 
finish coating for insulation. 

B. Mil. Spec. MIL-A-3316, Class 2: Adhesive for laps and for adhering 
insulation to metal surfaces. 

C. Mil. Spec. MIL-C-19565, Type I or Type II: Vapor barrier compound for 
indoor use. 

D. ASTM C449: Mineral fiber hydraulic-setting thermal insulating and 
finishing cement. 

E. Other: Insulation manufacturers' published recommendations. 

2.6 MECHANICAL FASTENERS 

A. Pins, anchors: Welded pins, or metal or nylon anchors with galvanized 
steel or fiber washer, or clips. Pin diameter shall be as recommended 
by the insulation manufacturer. 

B. Staples: Outward clinching galvanized steel 

C. Wire: 1.3 mm thick (18 gage) soft annealed galvanized or 1.9 mm (14 
gage) copper clad steel or nickel copper alloy. 

D. Bands: 13 mm (1/2 inch) nominal width, brass, galvanized steel, 
aluminum or stainless steel. 

2.7 REINFORCEMENT AND FINISHES 

A. Glass fabric, open weave: ASTM D1668, Type III (resin treated) and Type 
I (asphalt treated). 

B. Glass fiber fitting tape: Mil. Spec MIL-C-20079, Type II, Class 1. 


C. Tape for Flexible Elastomeric Cellular Insulation: As recommended by 
the insulation manufacturer. 

D. Hexagonal wire netting: 25 mm (one inch) mesh, 0.85 mm thick (22 gage) 
galvanized steel. 

E. Corner beads: 50 mm (2 inch) by 50 mm (2 inch), 0.55 mm thick (26 gage) 
galvanized steel; or, 25 mm (1 inch) by 25 mm (1 inch), 0.47 mm thick 
(28 gage) aluminum angle adhered to 50 mm (2 inch) by 50 mm (2 inch) 
Kraft paper. 

F. PVC fitting cover: Fed. Spec L-P-535, Composition A, 11-86 Type II, 
Grade GU, with Form B Mineral Fiber insert, for media temperature 4 
degrees C (40 degrees F) to 121 degrees C (250 degrees F). Below 4 
degrees C (40 degrees F) and above 121 degrees C (250 degrees F). 
Provide double layer insert. Provide color matching vapor barrier 
pressure sensitive tape. 

2.8 FIRESTOPPING MATERIAL 

 Other than pipe insulation, refer to Section 07 84 00 FIRESTOPPING. 

2.9 FLAME AND SMOKE 

 Unless shown otherwise all assembled systems shall meet flame spread 25 
and smoke developed 50 rating as developed under ASTM, NFPA and UL 
standards and specifications. See paragraph 1.3 "Quality Assurance". 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

A. Required pressure tests of piping joints and connections shall be 
completed and the work approved by the Resident Engineer for 
application of insulation. Surface shall be clean and dry with all 
foreign materials, such as dirt, oil, loose scale and rust removed. 

B. Except for specific exceptions, insulate all specified equipment, and 
piping (pipe, fittings, valves, accessories). Insulate each pipe 
individually. Do not use scrap pieces of insulation where a full length 
section will fit. 

C. Insulation materials shall be installed in a first class manner with 
smooth and even surfaces, with jackets and facings drawn tight and 
smoothly cemented down at all laps. Insulation shall be continuous 
through all sleeves and openings, except at fire dampers and duct 
heaters (NFPA 90A). Vapor retarders shall be continuous and 
uninterrupted throughout systems with operating temperature 16 degrees 
C (60 degrees F) and below. Lap and seal vapor barrier over ends and 
exposed edges of insulation. Anchors, supports and other metal 


projections through insulation on cold surfaces shall be insulated and 
vapor sealed for a minimum length of 150 mm (6 inches). 

D. Install vapor stops at all insulation terminations on either side of 
valves, pumps and equipment and particularly in straight lengths of 
pipe insulation. 

E. Construct insulation on parts of equipment such as cold water pumps and 
heat exchangers that must be opened periodically for maintenance or 
repair, so insulation can be removed and replaced without damage. 
Install insulation with bolted 1 mm thick (20 gage) galvanized steel or 
aluminum covers as complete units, or in sections, with all necessary 
supports, and split to coincide with flange/split of the equipment. 

F. Insulation on hot piping and equipment shall be terminated square at 
items not to be insulated, access openings and nameplates. Cover all 
exposed raw insulation with white sealer or jacket material. 

G. Protect all insulations outside of buildings with aluminum jacket using 
lock joint or other approved system for a continuous weather tight 
system. Access doors and other items requiring maintenance or access 
shall be removable and sealable. 

H. Plumbing work not to be insulated: 

1. Piping and valves of fire protection system. 

2. Chromium plated brass piping. 

3. Water piping in contact with earth. 

4. Small horizontal cold water branch runs in partitions to individual 
fixtures may be without insulation for maximum distance of 900 mm (3 
feet). 

5. Distilled water piping. 

I. Apply insulation materials subject to the manufacturer's recommended 
temperature limits. Apply adhesives, mastic and coatings at the 
manufacturer's recommended minimum coverage. 

J. Elbows, flanges and other fittings shall be insulated with the same 
material as is used on the pipe straights. 
Use of polyurethane spray-foam to fill a PVC elbow jacket is prohibited 
on cold applications. 

K. Firestop Pipe insulation: 

1. Provide firestopping insulation at fire and smoke barriers through 
penetrations. Fire stopping insulation shall be UL listed as defines 
in Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 


2. Pipe penetrations requiring fire stop insulation including, but not 
limited to the following: 

a. Pipe risers through floors 

b. Pipe chase walls and floors 

c. Smoke partitions 

d. Fire partitions 

L. Freeze protection of above grade outdoor piping (over heat tracing 
tape): 20 mm (0.75) thick insulation, for all pipe sizes 75 mm(3 
inches) and smaller and 25 mm(1inch) thick insulation for larger pipes. 
Provide metal jackets for all pipes. Provide for cold water make-up 
where indicated on the drawings as described in Section 23 21 13, 
HYDRONIC PIPING (electrical heat tracing systems). 

M. Provide vapor barrier jackets over insulation as follows: 

1. All piping exposed to outdoor weather. 

N. Provide metal jackets over insulation as follows: 

a. All plumbing piping exposed to outdoor weather. 

b. Piping exposed in building, within 1800 mm (6 feet) of the floor, 
that connects to sterilizers, kitchen and laundry equipment. 
Jackets may be applied with pop rivets. Provide aluminum angle 
ring escutcheons at wall, ceiling or floor penetrations. 

c. A 50 mm (2 inch) overlap is required at longitudinal and 
circumferential joints. 

3.2 INSULATION INSTALLATION 

A. Mineral Fiber Board: 

1. Faced board: Apply board on pins spaced not more than 300 mm (12 
inches) on center each way, and not less than 75 mm (3 inches) from 
each edge of board. In addition to pins, apply insulation bonding 
adhesive to entire underside of horizontal metal surfaces. Butt 
insulation edges tightly and seal all joints with laps and butt 
strips. After applying speed clips cut pins off flush and apply 
vapor seal patches over clips. 

2. Plain board: 

a. Insulation shall be scored, beveled or mitered to provide tight 
joints and be secured to equipment with bands spaced 225 mm (9 
inches) on center for irregular surfaces or with pins and clips 
on flat surfaces. Use corner beads to protect edges of 
insulation. 


b. For hot equipment: Stretch 25 mm (1 inch) mesh wire, with edges 
wire laced together, over insulation and finish with insulating 
and finishing cement applied in one coat, 6 mm (1/4 inch) thick, 
trowel led to a smooth finish. 

c. For cold equipment: Apply meshed glass fabric in a tack coat 1.5 
to 1.7 square meter per liter (60 to 70 square feet per gallon) 
of vapor mastic and finish with mastic at 0.3 to 0.4 square meter 
per liter (12 to 15 square feet per gallon) over the entire 
fabric surface. 

3. Cold equipment: 40 mm (1-1/2inch) thick insulation faced with ASJ. 

a. Water filter, chemical feeder pot or tank. 

b. Pneumatic, cold storage water and surge tanks. 

4. Hot equipment: 40 mm (1-1/2 inch) thick insulation faced with ASJ. 

a. Domestic water heaters and hot water storage tanks (not factory 
insulated). 

b. Booster water heaters for dietetics dish and pot washers and for 
washdown grease-extracting hoods. 

B. Molded Mineral Fiber Pipe and Tubing Covering: 

1. Fit insulation to pipe, aligning longitudinal joints. Seal 
longitudinal joint laps and circumferential butt strips by rubbing 
hard with a nylon sealing tool to assure a positive seal. Staples 
may be used to assist in securing insulation. Seal all vapor 
retarder penetrations on cold piping with a generous application of 
vapor barrier mastic. Provide inserts and install with metal 
insulation shields at outside pipe supports. Install freeze 
protection insulation over heating cable. 

2. Contractor's options for fitting, flange and valve insulation: 

a. Insulating and finishing cement for sizes less than 100 mm (4 
inches) operating at surface temperature of 16 degrees C (61 
degrees F) or more. 

b. Factory premolded, one piece PVC covers with mineral fiber, (Form 
B), inserts. Provide two insert layers for pipe temperatures 
below 4 degrees C (40 degrees F), or above 121 degrees C (250 
degrees F). Secure first layer of insulation with twine. Seal 
seam edges with vapor barrier mastic and secure with fitting 
tape. 

c. Factory molded, ASTM C547 or field mitered sections, joined with 
adhesive or wired in place. For hot piping finish with a 


smoothing coat of finishing cement. For cold fittings, 16 degrees 
C (60 degrees F) or less, vapor seal with a layer of glass 
fitting tape imbedded between two 2 mm (1/16 inch) coats of vapor 
barrier mastic. 

d. Fitting tape shall extend over the adjacent pipe insulation and 
overlap on itself at least 50 mm (2 inches). 

3. Nominal thickness in millimeters and inches specified in the 
schedule at the end of this section. 

 

C. Flexible Elastomeric Cellular Thermal Insulation: 

1. Apply insulation and fabricate fittings in accordance with the 
manufacturer's installation instructions and finish with two coats 
of weather resistant finish as recommended by the insulation 
manufacturer. 

2. Pipe and tubing insulation: 

a. Use proper size material. Do not stretch or strain insulation. 

b. To avoid undue compression of insulation, provide cork stoppers 
or wood inserts at supports as recommended by the insulation 
manufacturer. Insulation shields are specified under Section 22 
05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING. 

c. Where possible, slip insulation over the pipe or tubing prior to 
connection, and seal the butt joints with adhesive. Where the 
slip-on technique is not possible, slit the insulation and apply 
it to the pipe sealing the seam and joints with contact adhesive. 
Optional tape sealing, as recommended by the manufacturer, may be 
employed. Make changes from mineral fiber insulation in a 
straight run of pipe, not at a fitting. Seal joint with tape. 

3. Apply sheet insulation to flat or large curved surfaces with 100 
percent adhesive coverage. For fittings and large pipe, apply 
adhesive to seams only. 

4. Pipe insulation: nominal thickness in millimeters (inches as 
specified in the schedule at the end of this section. 

3.3 COMMISSIONING 

A. Provide commissioning documentation in accordance with the requirements 
of section 22 08 00 – COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS for all 
inspection, start up, and contractor testing required above and 
required by the System Readiness Checklist provided by the 
Commissioning Agent. 


B. Components provided under this section of the specification will be 
tested as part of a larger system. Refer to section 22 08 00 – 
COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS and related sections for contractor 
responsibilities for system commissioning. 

3.4 PIPE INSULATION SCHEDULE 

Provide insulation for piping systems as scheduled below: 

 

Insulation Thickness Millimeters (Inches) 

 

Nominal Pipe Size Millimeters (Inches) 

Operating 
Temperature 
Range/Service 

Insulation 
Material 

Less 
than 

25 (1) 

25 – 32 
(1 – 1¼) 

38 – 75 

(1½ - 3) 

100 (4) 
and Above 

 

 

 

 

 

 

38-60 degrees C 
(100-140 degrees F) 

(Domestic Hot Water 
Supply and Return) 

Mineral Fiber 
(Above ground 
piping only) 

38 
(1.5) 

38 (1.5) 

50 (2.0) 

50 (2.0) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4-16 degrees C 

(40-60 degrees F) 

 

Flexible 
Elastomeric 
Cellular 
Thermal (Above 
ground piping 
only) 

25 
(1.0) 

25(1.0) 

25 (1.0) 

25 (1.0) 



 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 22 08 00 

COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. The requirements of this Section apply to all sections of Division 22. 

B. This project will have selected building systems commissioned. The 
complete list of equipment and systems to be commissioned are specified 
in Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. The 
commissioning process, which the Contractor is responsible to execute, 
is defined in Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. A 
Commissioning Agent (CxA) appointed by the Department of Veterans 
Affairs will manage the commissioning process. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 00 00 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
B. Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. 
C. Section 01 33 23 SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 


1.3 SUMMARY 

A. This Section includes requirements for commissioning plumbing systems, 
subsystems and equipment. This Section supplements the general 
requirements specified in Section 01 91 00 General Commissioning 
Requirements. 

B. Refer to Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS for more 
specifics regarding processes and procedures as well as roles and 
responsibilities for all Commissioning Team members. 

1.4 DEFINITIONS 

A. Refer to Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS for 
definitions. 

1.5 COMMISSIONED SYSTEMS 

A. Commissioning of a system or systems specified in Division 22 is part 
of the construction process. Documentation and testing of these 
systems, as well as training of the VA’s Operation and Maintenance 
personnel in accordance with the requirements of Section 01 91 00 and 
of Division 22, is required in cooperation with the VA and the 
Commissioning Agent. 

B. The Plumbing systems commissioning will include the systems listed in 
Section 01 19 00 General Commissioning Requirements: 


1.6 SUBMITTALS 

A. The commissioning process requires review of selected Submittals. The 
Commissioning Agent will provide a list of submittals that will be 
reviewed by the Commissioning Agent. This list will be reviewed and 
approved by the VA prior to forwarding to the Contractor. Refer to 
Section 01 33 23 SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, and SAMPLES for further 
details. 

B. The commissioning process requires Submittal review simultaneously with 
engineering review. Specific submittal requirements related to the 
commissioning process are specified in Section 01 91 00 GENERAL 
COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS 

A. Commissioning of the Building Plumbing Systems will require inspection 
of individual elements of the Plumbing construction throughout the 
construction period. The Contractor shall coordinate with the 
Commissioning Agent in accordance with Section 01 91 00 and the 
Commissioning Plan to schedule inspections as required to support the 
commissioning process. 

3.2 PRE-FUNCTIONAL CHECKLISTS 

A. The Contractor shall complete Pre-Functional Checklists to verify 
systems, subsystems, and equipment installation is complete and systems 
are ready for Systems Functional Performance Testing. The 
Commissioning Agent will prepare Pre-Functional Checklists to be used 
to document equipment installation. The Contractor shall complete the 
checklists. Completed checklists shall be submitted to the VA and to 
the Commissioning Agent for review. The Commissioning Agent may spot 
check a sample of completed checklists. If the Commissioning Agent 
determines that the information provided on the checklist is not 
accurate, the Commissioning Agent will return the marked-up checklist 
to the Contractor for correction and resubmission. If the 
Commissioning Agent determines that a significant number of completed 
checklists for similar equipment are not accurate, the Commissioning 
Agent will select a broader sample of checklists for review. If the 
Commissioning Agent determines that a significant number of the broader 
sample of checklists is also inaccurate, all the checklists for the 
type of equipment will be returned to the Contractor for correction and 


resubmission. Refer to SECTION 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING 
REQUIREMENTS for submittal requirements for Pre-Functional Checklists, 
Equipment Startup Reports, and other commissioning documents. 

3.3 CONTRACTORS TESTS 

A. Contractor tests as required by other sections of Division 22 shall be 
scheduled and documented in accordance with Section 01 00 00 GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS. . All testing shall be incorporated into the project 
schedule. Contractor shall provide no less than 7 calendar days’ 
notice of testing. The Commissioning Agent will witness selected 
Contractor tests at the sole discretion of the Commissioning Agent. 
Contractor tests shall be completed prior to scheduling Systems 
Functional Performance Testing. 

3.4 SYSTEMS FUNCTIONAL PERFORMANCE TESTING: 

A. The Commissioning Process includes Systems Functional Performance 
Testing that is intended to test systems functional performance under 
steady state conditions, to test system reaction to changes in 
operating conditions, and system performance under emergency 
conditions. The Commissioning Agent will prepare detailed Systems 
Functional Performance Test procedures for review and approval by the 
Resident Engineer. The Contractor shall review and comment on the 
tests prior to approval. The Contractor shall provide the required 
labor, materials, and test equipment identified in the test procedure 
to perform the tests. The Commissioning Agent will witness and 
document the testing. The Contractor shall sign the test reports to 
verify tests were performed. See Section 01 91 00 GENERAL 
COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS, for additional details. 

3.5 TRAINING OF VA PERSONNEL 

A. Training of the VA operation and maintenance personnel is required in 
cooperation with the Resident Engineer and Commissioning Agent. 
Provide competent, factory authorized personnel to provide instruction 
to operation and maintenance personnel concerning the location, 
operation, and troubleshooting of the installed systems. Contractor 
shall submit training agendas and trainer resumes in accordance with 
the requirements of Section 01 19 00. The instruction shall be 
scheduled in coordination with the Resident Engineer after submission 
and approval of formal training plans. Refer to Section 01 91 00 
GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS and Division 22 Sections for 
additional Contractor training requirements. 


----- END ----- 

 


SECTION 22 11 00 
FACILITY WATER DISTRIBUTION 


PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Domestic water systems, including piping, equipment and all necessary 
accessories as designated in this section. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

B. Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

C. Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING. 

D. Section 23 07 11, HVAC, PLUMBING, AND BOILER PLANT INSULATION, PIPE 
INSULATION. 

E. SECTION 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS: Requirements for 
commissioning, systems readiness checklist, and training. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. All items listed in Part 2 - Products. 

1.4 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American National Standards Institute (ANSI): 

 American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): (Copyrighted Society) 

A13.1...................Scheme for Identification of Piping Systems 

B16.3-2011..............Malleable Iron Threaded Fittings Classes 150 
and 300 

B16.9-2007..............Factory-Made Wrought Butt Welding Fittings 

B16.11-2011.............Forged Fittings, Socket-Welding and Threaded 

B16.12-2009 ............Cast Iron Threaded Drainage Fittings 

B16.15-2006 ............Cast Copper Alloy Threaded Fittings Classes 125 
and 250 

B16.18-2001 (R2005).....Cast Copper Alloy Solder-Joint Pressure 
Fittings 

B16.22-2012.............Wrought Copper and Copper Alloy Solder Joint 
Pressure Fittings 


B16.51-2011.............Copper and Copper Alloy Press-Connect Fittings 

NSF/ANSI 61-2012........Drinking Water System Components - Health 
Effects 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A47/A47M-99(2009).......Ferritic Malleable Iron Castings 

A53/A53M-12.............Pipe, Steel, Black and Hot-Dipped, Zinc Coated 
Welded and Seamless 

A183-03(2009)...........Carbon Steel Track Bolts and Nuts 

A269–10.................Seamless and Welded Austenitic Stainless Steel 
Tubing for General Service 

A312/A312M-12...........Seamless, Welded, and Heavily Cold Worked 
Austenitic Stainless Steel Pipes 

A403/A403M-12...........Wrought Austenitic Stainless Steel Piping 
Fittings 

A536-84(2009)...........Ductile Iron Castings 

A733-03(2009)e1.........Welded and Seamless Carbon Steel and Austenitic 
Stainless Steel Pipe Nipples 

B32-08..................Solder Metal 

B61-08..................Steam or Valve Bronze Castings 

B62-09..................Composition Bronze or Ounce Metal Castings 

B75/B75M-11.............Seamless Copper Tube 

B88-09..................Seamless Copper Water Tube 

B584-12a................Copper Alloy Sand Castings for General 
Applications 

B687-99(2011)...........Brass, Copper, and Chromium-Plated Pipe Nipples 

D1785-12................Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe, 
Schedules 40, 80, and 120 

D2000-12................Rubber Products in Automotive Applications 

D4101-11................Propylene Plastic Injection and Extrusion 
Materials 

D2564-04(2009) e1.......Solvent Cements for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) 
Plastic Pipe and Fittings 

E1120-08................Liquid Chlorine 

E1229-08................Calcium Hypochlorite 

D. American Water Works Association (AWWA): 

C110/A21.10-12..........Ductile Iron and Gray Iron 

C151/A21.51-09..........Ductile-Iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast 

C153/A21.53-11..........Ductile-Iron Compact Fittings 


C203-08.................Coal-Tar Protective Coatings and Linings for 
Steel Water Pipelines - Enamel and Tape - Hot 
Applied 

C213-07.................Fusion Bonded Epoxy Coating for the Interior & 
Exterior of Steel Water Pipelines 

C651-05.................Disinfecting Water Mains 

E. American Welding Society (AWS): 

A5.8/A5.8M-2011.........Filler Metals for Brazing 

F. American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE): 

ANSI/ASSE 1001-2008.....Pipe Applied Atmospheric Type Vacuum Breakers 

ANSI/ASSE 1010-2004.....Water Hammer Arresters 

ANSI/ASSE 1018-2001.....Trap Seal Primer Valves – Potable Water 
Supplied 

ANSI/ASSE 1020-2004.....Pressure Vacuum Breaker Assembly 

G. International Code Council (ICC) 

ICC IPC (2012)..........International Plumbing Code 

H. NSF International (NSF) 

NSF/ANSI 14 (2013)......Plastics Piping System Components and Related 
Materials 

NSF/ANSI 61 (2012)......Drinking Water System Components – Health 
Effects 

NSF/ANSI 372 (2011).....Drinking Water System Components – Lead Content 

I. Plumbing and Drainage Institute (PDI): 

PDI WH-201 2010.........Water Hammer Arrestor 

1.5 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. A certificate of Welder’s certification shall be submitted prior to 
welding of steel piping. The certificate shall be current and no more 
than one year old. 

B. All grooved joint couplings, fittings, valves, and specialties shall be 
the products of a single manufacturer. Grooving tools shall be by the 
same manufacturer as the groove components. 

C. All castings used for coupling housings, fittings, valve bodies, etc., 
shall be date stamped for quality assurance and traceability. 

1.6 SPARE PARTS 

A. For mechanical press-connect fittings, provide tools required for each 
pipe size used at the facility. 


PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. Material or equipment containing a weighted average of greater than 
0.25 percent lead shall not be used in any potable water system 
intended for human consumption, and shall be certified in accordance 
with NSF/ANSI 61 or NSF 372. Endpoint devices used to dispense water 
for drinking must meet the requirements of NSF/ANSI 61, Section 9. 

B. Plastic pipe, fittings, and solvent cement shall meet NSF/ANSI 14 and 
shall be NSF listed for the service intended. 

2.2 ABOVE GROUND (INTERIOR) WATER PIPING 

A. Pipe: Copper tube, ASTM B88, Type K or L, drawn. For pipe 6 inches (150 
mm) and larger, stainless steel, ASTM A312, schedule 10 shall be used. 

B. Fittings for Copper Tube: 

1. Wrought copper or bronze castings conforming to ANSI B16.18 and 
B16.22. Unions shall be bronze, MSS SP72 & SP 110, Solder or braze 
joints. Use 95/5 tin and antimony for all soldered joints. 

2. Grooved fittings, 2 to 6 inch (50 to 150 mm) wrought copper ASTM B75 
C12200, 5 to 6 inch (125 to 150 mm) bronze casting ASTM B584, CDA 
844. Mechanical grooved couplings, ductile iron, ASTM A536 (Grade 
65-45-12), or malleable iron, ASTM A47 (Grade 32510) housing, with 
EPDM gasket, steel track head bolts, ASTM A183, coated with copper 
colored alkyd enamel. 

3. Mechanical press-connect fittings for copper pipe and tube shall 
conform to the material and sizing requirements of ASME B16.51, 2 
inch (50 mm)size and smaller mechanical press-connect fittings, 
double pressed type, with EPDM (ethylene propylene diene monomer) 
non-toxic synthetic rubber sealing elements and un-pressed fitting 
identification feature. 

4. Mechanically formed tee connection: Form mechanically extracted 
collars in a continuous operation by drilling pilot hole and drawing 
out tube surface to form collar, having a height of not less than 
three times the thickness of tube wall. Adjustable collaring device 
shall ensure proper tolerance and complete uniformity of the joint. 
Notch and dimple joining branch tube in a single process to provide 
free flow where the branch tube penetrates the fitting. Braze 
joints. 

C. Adapters: Provide adapters for joining screwed pipe to copper tubing. 

D. Solder: ASTM B32 Composition Sb5 HA or HB. Provide non-corrosive flux. 


E. Brazing alloy: AWS A5.8, Classification BCuP. 

2.3 EXPOSED WATER PIPING 

A. Finished Room: Use full iron pipe size chrome plated brass piping for 
exposed water piping connecting fixtures, casework, cabinets, equipment 
and reagent racks when not concealed by apron including those furnished 
by the Government or specified in other sections. 

1. Pipe: Fed. Spec. WW-P-351, standard weight. 

2. Fittings: ANSI B16.15 cast bronze threaded fittings with chrome 
finish. 

3. Nipples: ASTM B 687, Chromium-plated. 

4. Unions: Mss SP-72, SP-110, Brass or Bronze with chrome finish. 
Unions 2-1/2 inches (65 mm) and larger shall be flange type with 
approved gaskets. 

B. Unfinished Rooms, Mechanical Rooms and Kitchens: Chrome-plated brass 
piping is not required. Paint piping systems as specified in Section 09 
91 00, PAINTING. 

2.4 TRAP PRIMER WATER PIPING: 

A. Pipe: Copper tube, ASTM B88, type K, hard drawn. 

B. Fittings: Bronze castings conforming to ANSI B16.18 Solder joints. 

C. Solder: ASTM B32 composition Sb5. Provide non-corrosive flux. 

2.5 STRAINERS 

A. Provide on high pressure side of pressure reducing valves, on suction 
side of pumps, on inlet side of indicating and control instruments and 
equipment subject to sediment damage and where shown on drawings. 
Strainer element shall be removable without disconnection of piping. 

B. Water: Basket or "Y" type with easily removable cover and brass 
strainer basket. 

C. Body: Smaller than 3 inches (80 mm), brass or bronze; 3 inches (80 mm) 
and larger, cast iron or semi-steel. 

2.6 DIELECTRIC FITTINGS 

A. Provide dielectric couplings or unions between ferrous and non-ferrous 
pipe. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. General: Comply with the International Plumbing Code and the following: 

1. Install branch piping for water from the piping system and connect 
to all fixtures, valves, cocks, outlets, casework, cabinets and 


equipment, including those furnished by the Government or specified 
in other sections. 

2. Pipe shall be round and straight. Cutting shall be done with proper 
tools. Pipe, except for plastic and glass, shall be reamed to full 
size after cutting. 

3. All pipe runs shall be laid out to avoid interference with other 
work. 

4. Install union and shut-off valve on pressure piping at connections 
to equipment. 

5. Pipe Hangers, Supports and Accessories: 

a. All piping shall be supported per the International Plumbing 
Code. 

b. Shop Painting and Plating: Hangers, supports, rods, inserts and 
accessories used for pipe supports shall be shop coated with red 
lead or zinc chromate primer paint. Electroplated copper hanger 
rods, hangers and accessories may be used with copper tubing. 

c. Floor, Wall and Ceiling Plates, Supports, Hangers: 

1) Solid or split un-plated cast iron. 

2) All plates shall be provided with set screws. 

3) Pipe Hangers: Height adjustable clevis type. 

4) Adjustable Floor Rests and Base Flanges: Steel. 

5) Concrete Inserts: "Universal" or continuous slotted type. 

6) Hanger Rods: Mild, low carbon steel, fully threaded or 
Threaded at each end with two removable nuts at each end for 
positioning rod and hanger and locking each in place. 

7) Riser Clamps: Malleable iron or steel. 

8) Rollers: Cast iron. 

9) Self-drilling type expansion shields shall be "Phillips" type, 
with case hardened steel expander plugs. 

10) Hangers and supports utilized with insulated pipe and tubing 
shall have 180 degree (min.) metal protection shield Centered 
on and welded to the hanger and support. The shield shall be 4 
inches in length and be 16 gauge steel. The shield shall be 
sized for the insulation. 

11) Miscellaneous Materials: As specified, required, directed or 
as noted on the drawings for proper installation of hangers, 
supports and accessories. If the vertical distance exceeds 6 m 
(20 feet) for cast iron pipe additional support shall be 


provided in the center of that span. Provide all necessary 
auxiliary steel to provide that support. 

12) With the installation of each flexible expansion joint, 
provide piping restraints for the upstream and downstream 
section of the piping at the flexible expansion joint. 
Provide calculations supporting the restraint length design 
and type of selected restraints. 

6. Install chrome plated cast brass escutcheon with set screw at each 
wall, floor and ceiling penetration in exposed finished locations 
and within cabinets and millwork. 

7. Penetrations: 

a. Fire Stopping: Where pipes pass through fire partitions, fire 
walls, smoke partitions, or floors, install a fire stop that 
provides an effective barrier against the spread of fire, smoke 
and gases as specified in Section 07 84 00. Completely fill and 
seal clearances between raceways and openings with the fire 
stopping materials. 

b. Waterproofing: At floor penetrations, completely seal clearances 
around the pipe and make watertight with sealant as specified in 
Section 07 92 00. 

8. Mechanical press-connect fitting connections shall be made in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Depth 
of insertion must be marked on the tube prior to inserting the tube 
into the fitting. Ensure the tube is completely inserted to the 
fitting stop (appropriate depth) and squared with the fitting prior 
to applying the pressing jaws onto the fitting. The joints shall be 
pressed using the tool(s) approved by the manufacturer. Minimum 
distance between fittings shall be in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s requirements. When the pressing cycle is complete, 
visually inspect the joint to ensure the tube has remained fully 
inserted, as evidenced by the visible insertion mark. 

B. Piping shall conform to the following: 

1. Domestic Water: 

a. Grade all lines to facilitate drainage. Provide drain valves at 
bottom of risers and all low points in system. Design domestic 
hot water circulating lines with no traps. 

b. Connect branch lines at bottom of main serving fixtures below and 
pitch down so that main may be drained through fixture. Connect 


branch lines to top of main serving only fixtures located on 
floor above. 

3.2 TESTS 

A. General: Test system either in its entirety or in sections. Submit 
testing plan to Resident Engineer/COR 14 days prior to test date. 

B. Potable Water System: Test after installation of piping and domestic 
water heaters, but before piping is concealed, before covering is 
applied, and before plumbing fixtures are connected. Fill systems with 
water and maintain hydrostatic pressure of 150 psi (1040 kPa) gage for 
two hours. No decrease in pressure is allowed. Provide a pressure gage 
with a shutoff and bleeder valve at the highest point of the piping 
being tested. 

D. All Other Piping Tests: Test new installed piping under 1-1/2 times 
actual operating conditions and prove tight. 

3.3 COMMISSIONING 

A. Provide commissioning documentation accordance with the requirements of 
Section 22 08 00. 

B. Components provided under this section of the specification will be 
tested as part of a larger system. 

- - - E N D - - - 

 


SECTION 22 13 00 

FACILITY SANITARY AND VENT PIPING 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section pertains to sanitary sewer and vent systems, including 
piping, equipment and all necessary accessories as designated in this 
section. 

B. A complete listing of all acronyms and abbreviations are included in 
Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

B. Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

C. Section 01 81 11, SUSTAINABLE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS. 

 D. Section 01 91 00, GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. 

E. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING: Penetrations in rated enclosures. 

F. Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS: Sealant products. 

G. Section 09 91 00, PAINTING: Preparation and finish painting and 
identification of piping systems. 

H. Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING: Pipe Hangers and 
Supports, Materials Identification. 

I. Section 22 07 11, PLUMBING INSULATION. 

 J. Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS 

K. Section 26 05 26, GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS 

L. Section 26 05 33, RACEWAY AND BOXES FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS 

1.3 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

A13.1-2007..............Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems 

A112.36.2M-1991(R 2012).Cleanouts 

A112.6.3-2001 (R2007)...Standard for Floor and Trench Drains 

B1.20.1-2013............Pipe Threads, General Purpose (Inch) 

B16.1-2010..............Gray Iron Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings 

B16.4-2011..............Standard for Grey Iron Threaded Fittings 
Classes 125 and 250 

B16.39-2009.............Malleable Iron Threaded Pipe Unions Classes 
150, 250, and 300 


B18.2.1-2012............Square, Hex, Heavy Hex, and Askew Head Bolts 
and Hex, Heavy Hex, Hex Flange, Lobed Head, and 
Lag Screws (Inch Series) 

C. American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE): 

1001-2008...............Performance Requirements for Atmospheric Type 
Vacuum Breakers 

1018-2001...............Performance Requirements for Trap Seal Primer 
Valves – Potable Water Supplied 

1044-2001...............Performance Requirements for Trap Seal Primer 
Devices – Drainage Types and Electronic Design 
Types 

D. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A53/A53M-2012...........Standard Specification for Pipe, Steel, Black 
And Hot-Dipped, Zinc-coated, Welded and 
Seamless 

A74-2013a...............Standard Specification for Cast Iron Soil Pipe 
and Fittings 

A888-2013a..............Standard Specification for Hubless Cast Iron 
Soil Pipe and Fittings for Sanitary and Storm 
Drain, Waste, and Vent Piping Applications 

B32-2008................Standard Specification for Solder Metal 

C564-2012...............Standard Specification for Rubber Gaskets for 
Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings 

D1785-2012..............Standard Specification for Poly(Vinyl Chloride) 
(PVC) Plastic Pipe, Schedules 40, 80, and 120 

D2321-2011..............Standard Practice for Underground Installation 
of Thermoplastic Pipe for Sewers and Other 
Gravity-Flow Applications 

D2564-2012..............Standard Specification for Solvent Cements for 
Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Piping 
Systems 

D2665-2012..............Standard Specification for Poly(Vinyl Chloride) 
(PVC) Plastic Drain, Waste, and Vent Pipe and 
Fittings 

D2855-1996 (R 2010).....Standard Practice for Making Solvent-Cemented 
Joints with Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Pipe and 
Fittings 


D5926-2011..............Standard Specification for Poly(Vinyl Chloride) 
(PVC) Gaskets for Drain, Waste, and Vent (DWV), 
Sewer, Sanitary, and Storm Plumbing Systems 

F402-2005 (R 2012)......Standard Practice for Safe Handling of Solvent 
Cements, Primers, and Cleaners Used for Joining 
Thermoplastic Pipe and Fittings 

F477-2010...............Standard Specification for Elastomeric Seals 
(Gaskets) for Joining Plastic Pipe 

F1545-1997 (R 2009).....Standard Specification for Plastic-Lined 
Ferrous Metal Pipe, Fittings, and Flanges 

E. Cast Iron Soil Pipe Institute (CISPI): 

2006....................Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings Handbook 

301-2012................Standard Specification for Hubless Cast Iron 
Soil Pipe and Fittings for Sanitary and Storm 
Drain, Waste, and Vent Piping Applications 

310-2012................Specification for Coupling for Use in 
Connection with Hubless Cast Iron Soil Pipe and 
Fittings for Sanitary and Storm Drain, Waste, 
and Vent Piping Applications 

F. Copper Development Association, Inc. (CDA): 

A4015...................Copper Tube Handbook 

G. International Code Council (ICC): 

IPC-2012................International Plumbing Code 

H. Manufacturers Standardization Society (MSS): 

SP-123-2013.............Non-Ferrous Threaded and Solder-Joint Unions 
for Use With Copper Water Tube 

I. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

70-2011.................National Electrical Code (NEC) 

J. Plumbing and Drainage Institute (PDI): 

WH-201 (R 2010).........Water Hammer Arrestors Standard 

K. Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

508-99 (R2013)..........Standard For Industrial Control Equipment 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submittals, including number of required copies, shall be submitted in 
accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, and 
SAMPLES. 


B. Information and material submitted under this section shall be marked 
“SUBMITTED UNDER SECTION 22 13 00, FACILITY SANITARY AND VENT PIPING”, 
with applicable paragraph identification. 

C. Manufacturer's Literature and Data including: Full item description and 
optional features and accessories. Include dimensions, weights, 
materials, applications, standard compliance, model numbers, size, and 
capacity. 

1. Piping. 

2. Floor Drains. 

4. Cleanouts. 

5. Trap Seal Protection. 

6. Penetration Sleeves. 

7. Pipe Fittings. 

8. Traps. 

9. Exposed Piping and Fittings. 

D. Detailed shop drawing of clamping device and extensions when required 
in connection with the waterproofing membrane or the floor drain. 

1.6 AS-BUILT DOCUMENTATION 

A. The installing contractor shall maintain as-built drawings of each 
completed phase for verification; and, shall provide the complete set 
at the time of final systems certification testing. As-built drawings 
are to be provided, and a copy of them on Auto-Cad version 2013 
provided on compact disk or DVD. Should the installing contractor 
engage the testing company to provide as-built or any portion thereof, 
it shall not be deemed a conflict of interest or breach of the ‘third 
party testing company’ requirement. 

B. Certification documentation shall be provided prior to submitting the 
request for final inspection. The documentation shall include all test 
results, the names of individuals performing work for the testing 
agency on this project, detailed procedures followed for all tests, and 
a certification that all results of tests were within limits specified. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 SANITARY WASTE, DRAIN, AND VENT PIPING 

A. Cast iron waste, drain, and vent pipe and fittings. 

1. Cast iron waste, drain, and vent pipe and fittings shall be used for 
the following applications: 

a. Pipe buried in or in contact with earth. 


b. Sanitary pipe extensions to a distance of approximately 1500 mm 
(5 feet) outside of the building. 

c. Interior waste and vent piping above grade. 

2. Cast iron Pipe shall be bell and spigot or hubless (plain end or nohub 
or hubless). 

3. The material for all pipe and fittings shall be cast iron soil pipe 
and fittings and shall conform to the requirements of CISPI 301, 
ASTM A888, or ASTM A74. 

4. Cast iron pipe and fittings shall be made from a minimum of 95 
percent post-consumer recycled material. 

5. Joints for hubless pipe and fittings shall conform to the 
manufacturer’s installation instructions. Couplings for hubless 
joints shall conform to CISPI 310. Joints for hub and spigot pipe 
shall be installed with compression gaskets conforming to the 
requirements of ASTM C564. 

 B. Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) 

1. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe and fittings are permitted where the 
waste temperature is below 60 degrees C (140 degrees F). 

2. PVC piping and fittings shall NOT be used for the following 
applications: 

a. Waste collected from steam condensate drains. 

b. Spaces such as mechanical equipment rooms, kitchens, Sterile 
Processing Services, sterilizer areas, and areas designated for 
sleep. 

c. Vertical waste and soil stacks serving more than two floors. 

d. Exposed in mechanical equipment rooms. 

e. Exposed inside of ceiling return plenums. 

3. Polyvinyl chloride sanitary waste, drain, and vent pipe and fittings 
shall be solid core sewer piping conforming to ASTM D2665, sewer and 
drain series with ends for solvent cemented joints. 

4. Fittings: PVC fittings shall be solvent welded socket type using 
solvent cement conforming to ASTM D2564. 

2.2 EXPOSED WASTE PIPING 

A. Chrome plated brass piping of full iron pipe size shall be used in 
finished rooms for exposed waste piping connecting fixtures, casework, 
cabinets, equipment and reagent racks when not concealed by apron 
including those furnished by the Government or specified in other 
sections. 


1. The Pipe shall meet ASTM B43, regular weight. 

2. The Fittings shall conform to ASME B16.15. 

3. Nipples shall conform to ASTM B687, Chromium-plated. 

4. Unions shall be brass or bronze with chrome finish. Unions 65 mm 
(2-1/2 inches) and larger shall be flange type with approved 
gaskets. 

B. In unfinished Rooms such as mechanical Rooms and Kitchens, 
Chrome-plated brass piping is not required. The pipe materials 
specified under the paragraph “Sanitary Waste, Drain, and Vent Piping” 
can be used. The sanitary pipe in unfinished rooms shall be painted as 
specified in Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

2.3 SPECIALTY PIPE FITTINGS 

A. Transition pipe couplings shall join piping with small differences in 
outside diameters or different materials. End connections shall be of 
the same size and compatible with the pipes being joined. The 
transition coupling shall be elastomeric, sleeve type reducing or 
transition pattern and include shear and corrosion resistant metal, 
tension band and tightening mechanism on each end. The transition 
coupling sleeve coupling shall be of the following material: 

1. For cast iron soil pipes, the sleeve material shall be rubber 
conforming to ASTM C564. 

 2. For PVC soil pipes, the sleeve material shall be elastomeric seal or 
PVC, conforming to ASTM F477 or ASTM D5926. 

3. For dissimilar pipes, the sleeve material shall be PVC conforming to 
ASTM D5926, or other material compatible with the pipe materials 
being joined. 

B. The dielectric fittings shall conform to ASSE 1079 with a pressure 
rating of 861 kPa (125 psig) at a minimum temperature of 82 degrees C 
(180 degrees F). The end connection shall be solder joint copper alloy 
and threaded ferrous. 

C. Dielectric flange insulating kits shall be of non-conducting materials 
for field assembly of companion flanges with a pressure rating of 1035 
kPa (150 psig). The gasket shall be neoprene or phenolic. The bolt 
sleeves shall be phenolic or polyethylene. The washers shall be 
phenolic with steel backing washers. 

D. The di-electric nipples shall be electroplated steel nipple complying 
with ASTM F1545 with a pressure rating of 2070 kPa (300 psig) at 107 


degrees C (225 degrees F). The end connection shall be male threaded. 
The lining shall be inert and noncorrosive propylene. 

2.4 CLEANOUTS 

A. Cleanouts shall be the same size as the pipe, up to 100 mm (4 inches); 
and not less than 100 mm (4 inches) for larger pipe. Cleanouts shall be 
easily accessible and shall be gastight and watertight. Minimum 
clearance of 600 mm (24 inches) shall be provided for clearing a 
clogged sanitary line. 

B. Floor cleanouts shall be gray iron housing with clamping device and 
round, secured, scoriated, gray iron cover conforming to ASME 
A112.36.2M. A gray iron ferrule with hubless, socket, inside calk or 
spigot connection and counter sunk, taper-thread, brass or bronze 
closure plug shall be included. The frame and cover material and finish 
shall be nickel-bronze copper alloy with a square shape. The cleanout 
shall be vertically adjustable for a minimum of 50 mm (2 inches). When 
a waterproof membrane is used in the floor system, clamping collars 
shall be provided on the cleanouts. Cleanouts shall consist of wye 
fittings and eighth bends with brass or bronze screw plugs. Cleanouts 
in the resilient tile floors, quarry tile and ceramic tile floors shall 
be provided with square top covers recessed for tile insertion. In the 
carpeted areas, carpet cleanout markers shall be provided. Two way 
cleanouts shall be provided where indicated on drawings and at every 
building exit. The loading classification for cleanouts in sidewalk 
areas or subject to vehicular traffic shall be heavy duty type. 

C. Cleanouts shall be provided at or near the base of the vertical stacks 
with the cleanout plug located approximately 600 mm (24 inches) above 
the floor. If there are no fixtures installed on the lowest floor, the 
cleanout shall be installed at the base of the stack. The cleanouts 
shall be extended to the wall access cover. Cleanout shall consist of 
sanitary tees. Nickel-bronze square frame and stainless steel cover 
with minimum opening of 150 by 150 mm (6 by 6 inches) shall be 
furnished at each wall cleanout. Where the piping is concealed, a 
fixture trap or a fixture with integral trap, readily removable without 
disturbing concealed pipe, shall be accepted as a cleanout equivalent 
providing the opening to be used as a cleanout opening is the size 
required. 

D. In horizontal runs above grade, cleanouts shall consist of cast brass 
tapered screw plug in fitting or caulked/hubless cast iron ferrule. 


Plain end (hubless) piping in interstitial space or above ceiling may 
use plain end (hubless) blind plug and clamp. 

2.5 TRAPS 

A. Traps shall be provided on all sanitary branch waste connections from 
fixtures or equipment not provided with traps. Exposed brass shall be 
polished brass chromium plated with nipple and set screw escutcheons. 
Concealed traps may be rough cast brass or same material as the piping 
they are connected to. Slip joints are not permitted on sewer side of 
trap. Traps shall correspond to fittings on cast iron soil pipe or 
steel pipe respectively, and size shall be as required by connected 
service or fixture. 

2.6 PENETRATION SLEEVES 

A. A sleeve flashing device shall be provided at points where pipes pass 
through membrane waterproofed floors or walls. The sleeve flashing 
device shall be manufactured, cast iron fitting with clamping device 
that forms a sleeve for the pipe floor penetration of the floor 
membrane. A galvanized steel pipe extension shall be included in the 
top of the fitting that will extend 50 mm (2 inches) above finished 
floor and galvanized steel pipe extension in the bottom of the fitting 
that will extend through the floor slab. A waterproof caulked joint 
shall be provided at the top hub. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 PIPE INSTALLATION 

A. The pipe installation shall comply with the requirements of the 
International Plumbing Code (IPC) and these specifications. 

B. Branch piping shall be installed for waste from the respective piping 
systems and connect to all fixtures, valves, cocks, outlets, casework, 
cabinets and equipment, including those furnished by the Government or 
specified in other sections. 

C. Pipe shall be round and straight. Cutting shall be done with proper 
tools. Pipe shall be reamed to full size after cutting. 

D. All pipe runs shall be laid out to avoid interference with other work. 

E. The piping shall be installed above accessible ceilings where possible. 

F. The piping shall be installed to permit valve servicing or operation. 

G. The piping shall be installed free of sags and bends. 

H. Seismic restraint shall be installed where required by code. 

I. Changes in direction for soil and waste drainage and vent piping shall 
be made using appropriate branches, bends and long sweep bends. 


Sanitary tees and short sweep quarter bends may be used on vertical 
stacks if change in direction of flow is from horizontal to vertical. 
Long turn double wye branch and eighth bend fittings shall be used if 
two fixtures are installed back to back or side by side with common 
drain pipe. Straight tees, elbows, and crosses may be used on vent 
lines. Do not change direction of flow more than 90 degrees. Proper 
size of standard increaser and reducers shall be used if pipes of 
different sizes are connected. Reducing size of drainage piping in 
direction of flow is prohibited. 

J. Buried soil and waste drainage and vent piping shall be laid beginning 
at the low point of each system. Piping shall be installed true to 
grades and alignment indicated with unbroken continuity of invert. Hub 
ends shall be placed upstream. Required gaskets shall be installed 
according to manufacturer’s written instruction for use of lubricants, 
cements, and other installation requirements. 

K. Cast iron piping shall be installed according to CISPI’s “Cast Iron 
Soil Pipe and Fittings Handbook,” Chapter IV, “Installation of Cast 
Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings” 

 L. Aboveground PVC piping shall be installed according to ASTM D2665. 
Underground PVC piping shall be installed according to ASTM D2321. 

M. If an installation is unsatisfactory to the COR, the Contractor shall 
correct the installation at no cost to the Government. 

3.2 JOINT CONSTRUCTION 

A. Hub and spigot, cast iron piping with gasket joints shall be joined in 
accordance with CISPI’s “Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings Handbook” for 
compression joints. 

B. Hub and spigot, cast iron piping with calked joints shall be joined in 
accordance with CISPI’s “Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings Handbook” for 
lead and oakum calked joints. 

C. Hubless or No-hub, cast iron piping shall be joined in accordance with 
CISPI’s “Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings Handbook” for hubless piping 
coupling joints. 

D. For threaded joints, thread pipe with tapered pipe threads according to 
ASME B1.20.1. The threads shall be cut full and clean using sharp disc 
cutters. Threaded pipe ends shall be reamed to remove burrs and 
restored to full pipe inside diameter. Pipe fittings and valves shall 
be joined as follows: 


1. Apply appropriate tape or thread compound to external pipe threads 
unless dry seal threading is required by the pipe service. 

2. Pipe sections with damaged threads shall be replaced with new 
sections of pipe. 

E. Copper tube and fittings with soldered joints shall be joined according 
to ASTM B828. A water flushable, lead free flux conforming to ASTM B813 
and a lead free alloy solder conforming to ASTM B32 shall be used. 

 F. For PVC piping, solvent cement joints shall be used for joints. All 
surfaces shall be cleaned and dry prior to applying the primer and 
solvent cement. Installation practices shall comply with ASTM F402. The 
joint shall conform to ASTM D2855 and ASTM D2665 appendixes. 

3.3 SPECIALTY PIPE FITTINGS 

A. Transition coupling shall be installed at pipe joints with small 
differences in pipe outside diameters. 

B. Dielectric fittings shall be installed at connections of dissimilar 
metal piping and tubing. 

3.4 PIPE HANGERS, SUPPORTS AND ACCESSORIES 

A. All piping shall be supported according to the International Plumbing 
Code (IPC), Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING, and 
these specifications. Where conflicts arise between these the code and 
Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING the most restrictive 
or the requirement that specifies supports with highest loading or 
shortest spacing shall apply. 

B. Hangers, supports, rods, inserts and accessories used for pipe supports 
shall be painted according to Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. Electroplated 
copper hanger rods, hangers and accessories may be used with copper 
tubing. 

C. Horizontal piping and tubing shall be supported within 300 mm (12 
inches) of each fitting or coupling. 

D. Horizontal cast iron piping shall be supported with the following 
maximum horizontal spacing and minimum hanger rod diameters: 

1. 40 mm or DN40 to 50 mm or DN50 (NPS 1-1/2 inch to NPS 2 inch): 1500 
mm (60 inches) with 10 mm (3/8 inch) rod. 

2. 75 mm or DN75 (NPS 3 inch): 1500 mm (60 inches) with 15 mm (1/2 
inch) rod. 

3. 100 mm or DN100 to 125 mm or DN125 (NPS 4 inch to NPS 5 inch): 1500 
mm (60 inches) with 18 mm (5/8 inch) rod. 


4. 150 mm or DN150 to 200 mm or DN200 (NPS 6 inch to NPS 8 inch): 1500 
mm (60 inches) with 20 mm (3/4 inch) rod. 

5. 250 mm or DN250 to 300 mm or DN300 (NPS 10 inch to NPS 12 inch): 
1500 mm (60 inch) with 23 mm (7/8 inch) rod. 

 E. The maximum spacing for plastic pipe shall be 1.22 m (4 feet). 

F. Vertical piping and tubing shall be supported at the base, at each 
floor, and at intervals no greater than 4.6 m (15 feet). 

G. In addition to the requirements in Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK 
RESULTS FOR PLUMBING, Floor, Wall and Ceiling Plates, Supports, Hangers 
shall have the following characteristics: 

1. Solid or split unplated cast iron. 

2. All plates shall be provided with set screws. 

3. Height adjustable clevis type pipe hangers. 

4. Adjustable floor rests and base flanges shall be steel. 

5. Hanger rods shall be low carbon steel, fully threaded or threaded at 
each end with two removable nuts at each end for positioning rod and 
hanger and locking each in place. 

6. Riser clamps shall be malleable iron or steel. 

7. Rollers shall be cast iron. 

8. See Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING, for 
requirements on insulated pipe protective shields at hanger 
supports. 

H. Miscellaneous materials shall be provided as specified, required, 
directed or as noted on the drawings for proper installation of 
hangers, supports and accessories. If the vertical distance exceeds 6.1 
m (20 feet) for cast iron pipe additional support shall be provided in 
the center of that span. All necessary auxiliary steel shall be 
provided to provide that support. 

I. Cast escutcheon with set screw shall be provided at each wall, floor 
and ceiling penetration in exposed finished locations and within 
cabinets and millwork. 

J. Penetrations: 

1. Fire Stopping: Where pipes pass through fire partitions, fire walls, 
smoke partitions, or floors, a fire stop shall be installed that 
provides an effective barrier against the spread of fire, smoke and 
gases as specified in Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. Clearances 
between raceways and openings shall be completely filled and sealed 
with the fire stopping materials. 


2. Water proofing: At floor penetrations, clearances shall be 
completely sealed around the pipe and make watertight with sealant 
as specified in Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

3.5 TESTS 

A. Sanitary waste and drain systems shall be tested either in its entirety 
or in sections. 

B. Waste System tests shall be conducted before trenches are backfilled or 
fixtures are connected. A water test or air test shall be conducted, as 
directed. 

1. If entire system is tested for a water test, tightly close all 
openings in pipes except highest opening, and fill system with water 
to point of overflow. If the waste system is tested in sections, 
tightly plug each opening except highest opening of section under 
test, fill each section with water and test with at least a 3 m (10 
foot) head of water. In testing successive sections, test at least 
upper 3 m (10 feet) of next preceding section so that each joint or 
pipe except upper most 3 m (10 feet) of system has been submitted to 
a test of at least a 3 m (10 foot) head of water. Water shall be 
kept in the system, or in portion under test, for at least 15 
minutes before inspection starts. System shall then be tight at all 
joints. 

2. For an air test, an air pressure of 34 kPa (5 psig) gage shall be 
maintained for at least 15 minutes without leakage. A force pump and 
mercury column gage shall be used for the air test. 

3. After installing all fixtures and equipment, open water supply so 
that all p-traps can be observed. For 15 minutes of operation, all 
p-traps shall be inspected for leaks and any leaks found shall be 
corrected. 

4. Final Tests: Either one of the following tests may be used. 

a. Smoke Test: After fixtures are permanently connected and traps 
are filled with water, fill entire drainage and vent systems with 
smoke under pressure of .25 kPa (1 inch of water) with a smoke 
machine. Chemical smoke is prohibited. 

b. Peppermint Test: Introduce 60 ml (2 ounces) of peppermint into 
each line or stack. 

3.6 COMMISSIONING 

A. Provide commissioning documentation in accordance with the requirements 
of Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 


B. Components provided under this section of the specification will be 
tested as part of a larger system. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 22 40 00 
PLUMBING FIXTURES 


PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Plumbing fixtures, associated trim and fittings necessary to make a 
complete installation from wall or floor connections to rough piping, 
and certain accessories. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Sealing between fixtures and other finish surfaces: Section 07 92 00, 
JOINT SEALANTS. 

B. Flush panel access doors: Section 08 31 13, ACCESS DOORS AND FRAMES. 

C. Through bolts: Section 10 21 13, TOILET COMPARTMENTS. 

D. Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING. 

E. SECTION 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 

 Requirements for commissioning, systems readiness checklist, and 
training. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Submit plumbing fixture information in an assembled brochure, showing 
cuts and full detailed description of each fixture. 

1.4 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American National Standard Institute (ANSI): 

 The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

A112.6.1M-02(R2008).....Floor Affixed Supports for Off-the-Floor 
Plumbing Fixtures for Public Use 

A112.19.1M-08 ..........Enameled Cast Iron Plumbing Fixtures 

A112.19.2M-03...........Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures 

A112.19.3-2001(R2008)...Stainless Steel Plumbing Fixtures (Designed for 
Residential Use) 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A276-2010 ..............Stainless and Heat-Resisting Steel Bars and 
Shapes 

WW-P-541-E/GEN .........Plumbing Fixtures with Amendment 1 

D. National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM): NAAMM 
AMP 500-505 

Metal Finishes Manual (1988) 


E. American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE): 

1016-05.................Performance Requirements for Individual 
Thermostatic, Pressure Balancing and Combination 
Pressure Balancing and Thermostatic Control 
Valves for Individual Fixture Fittings 

F. NSF International (NSF) 

NSF/ANSI 14 (2013)......Plastics Piping System Components and Related 
Materials 

NSF/ANSI 61 (2012)......Drinking Water System Components – Health 
Effects 

NSF/ANSI 372 (2011).....Drinking Water System Components – Lead Content 

G. American with Disabilities Act (A.D.A) Section 4-19.4 Exposed Pipes and 
Surfaces 

H. Environmental Protection Agency EPA PL 93-523 1974; A 1999) Safe 
Drinking Water Act. 

I. International Building Code, ICC IPC 2012. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS 

A. Material or equipment containing a weighted average of greater than 0.25 
percent lead shall not be used in any potable water system intended for 
human consumption, and shall be certified in accordance with NSF/ANSI 61 
or NSF 372. Endpoint devices used to dispense water for drinking must 
meet the requirements of NSF/ANSI 61, Section 9. 

B. Plastic pipe, fittings, and solvent cement shall meet NSF/ANSI 14 and 
shall be NSF listed for the service intended. 

2.2 STAINLESS STEEL 

A. Corrosion-resistant Steel (CRS): 

1. Plate, Sheet and Strip: CRS flat products shall conform to chemical 
composition requirements of any 300 series steel specified in ASTM 
A276. 

2. Finish: Exposed surfaces shall have standard polish (ground and 
polished) equal to NAAMM finish Number 4. 

B. Die-cast zinc alloy products are prohibited. 

2.3 STOPS 

A. Provide lock-shield loose key or screw driver pattern angle stops, 
straight stops or stops integral with faucet, with each compression type 
faucet whether specifically called for or not, including sinks in wood 
and metal casework, laboratory furniture and pharmacy furniture. Locate 
stops centrally above or below fixture in accessible location. 

B. Furnish keys for lock shield stops to Resident Engineer. 


C. Supply from stops not integral with faucet shall be chrome plated copper 
flexible tubing or flexible stainless steel with inner core of non-toxic 
polymer. 

D. Supply pipe from wall to valve stop shall be rigid threaded IPS copper 
alloy pipe, i.e. red brass pipe nipple, chrome plated where exposed. 

E. Psychiatric Area: Provide stainless steel drain guard for all lavatories 
not installed in casework. 

2.4 ESCUTCHEONS 

 Heavy type, chrome plated, with set screws. Provide for piping serving 
plumbing fixtures and at each wall, ceiling and floor penetrations in 
exposed finished locations and within cabinets and millwork. 

2.5 LAMINAR FLOW CONTROL DEVICE 

A. Smooth, bright stainless steel or satin finish, chrome plated metal 
laminar flow device shall provide non-aeration, clear, coherent laminar 
flow that will not splash in basin. Device shall also have a flow 
control restrictor and have vandal resistant housing. 

B. Flow Control Restrictor: 

1. Capable of restricting flow from 95 ml/s to 110 ml/s (1.5 gpm to 1.7 
gpm) for lavatories; 125 ml/s to 140 ml/s (2.0 gpm to 2.2 gpm) for 
sinks P-505 through P-520, P-524 and P-528; and 170 ml/s to 190 ml/s 
(2.75 gpm to 3.0 gpm) for dietary food preparation and rinse sinks or 
as specified. 

2. Compensates for pressure fluctuation maintaining flow rate specified 
above within 10 percent between 170 kPa and 550 kPa (25 psi and 80 
psi). 

3. Operates by expansion and contraction, eliminates mineral/sediment 
build-up with self-cleaning action, and is capable of easy manual 
cleaning. 

2.6 CARRIERS 

A. ASME/ANSI A112.6.1M, with adjustable gasket faceplate chair carriers for 
wall hung closets with auxiliary anchor foot assembly, hanger rod 
support feet, and rear anchor tie down. 

B. ASME/ANSI A112.6.1M, lavatory, steel plate as detailed on drawing. All 
lavatory chair carriers shall be capable of supporting the lavatory with 
a 250-pound vertical load applied at the front of the fixture. 

C. Where water closets, lavatories or sinks are installed back-to-back and 
carriers are specified, provide one carrier to serve both fixtures in 
lieu of individual carriers. The drainage fitting of the back to back 
carrier shall be so constructed that it prevents the discharge from one 
fixture from flowing into the opposite fixture. 


2.7 WATER CLOSETS 

A. (P-103) Water Closet (Wall Hung, ASME/ANSI A112.19.2M, Figure 9) office 
and industrial, elongated bowl, siphon jet 6 L (1.6 gallons) per flush, 
wall outlet. Top of rim shall be between 406 mm and 432 mm (16 inches 
and 17 inches) above finished floor. Handicapped water closet shall have 
rim set 457 mm (18 inches) above finished floor. 

1. Seat: Institutional/Industrial, extra heavy duty, chemical resistant, 
solid plastic, open front less cover for elongated bowls, integrally 
molded bumpers, concealed check hinge with stainless steel post. Seat 
shall be posture contoured body design. Color shall be white. 

2. Fittings and Accessories: Gaskets-neoprene; bolts with chromium 
plated caps nuts and washers. 

3. Flush valve: Large chloramines resistant diaphragm, semi-red brass 
valve body, exposed chrome plated, battery powered active infra-red 
sensor for automatic operation with courtesy flush button for manual 
operation water saver design 6 L (1.6 gallons) per flush with 
maximum 10 percent variance 25 mm (1 inch) screwdriver back check 
angle stop with vandal resistant cap, adjustable tailpiece, a high 
back pressure vacuum breaker, spud coupling for 38 mm (1 1/2 inches) 
top spud, wall and spud flanges, and sweat solder adapter with cover 
tube and set screw wall flange. Valve body, cover, tailpiece and 
control stop shall be in conformance with ASTM alloy classification 
for semi-red brass. Seat bumpers shall be integral part of flush 
valve. Set centerline of inlet 292 mm (11 1/2 inches) above rim. 

2.8 LAVATORIES 

A. Dimensions for lavatories are specified, Length by width (distance from 
wall) and depth. 

B. Brass components in contact with water shall contain no more than 3 
percent lead content by dry weight. 

C. (P-414) Lavatory (Wrist Control, ASME/ANSI A112.19.2M, Figure 16) 
straight back, approximately 508 mm by 457 mm (20 inches by 18 inches) 
and a 102 mm (4 inches) minimum apron, first quality vitreous china. 
Punching for faucet shall be on 203 mm (8 inches) centers. Set rim 864 
mm (34 inches) above finished floor. 

1. Faucet: Solid cast brass construction with washerless ceramic mixing 
cartridge type and centrally exposed rigid gooseneck spout with 
outlet 102 mm to 127 mm (4 inches to 5 inches) above rim. Provide 
laminar flow control device. One hundred two millimeter (4-inch) 
wrist blade type, handles on faucets shall be cast, formed or drop 
forged copper alloy. Faucet, wall and floor escutcheons shall be 
either copper alloy or CRS. Exposed metal parts, including exposed 


part under valve handle when in open position, shall be chrome plated 
with a smooth bright finish. 

2. Drain: Cast or wrought brass with flat grid strainer, offset 
tailpiece, chrome plated. 

3. Stops: Angle type. See paragraph 2.2.Stops 

4. Trap: Cast copper alloy, 38 mm by 32 mm (1 1/2 inches by 1 1/4 
inches)P-trap. Adjustable with connected elbow and 1.4 mm thick (17 
gauge) tubing extension to wall. Exposed metal trap surface, and 
connection hardware shall be chrome plated with a smooth bright 
finish. Set trap parallel to the wall. 

5. Provide cover for drain, stops and trap per A.D.A 4-19.4. 

D. (P-418) Lavatory (Sensor Control, Gooseneck Spout, ASME/ANSI A112.19.2M, 
Figure 16) straight back, approximately 508 mm by 457 mm (20 inches by 
18 inches) and a 102 mm (4 inches) minimum apron, first quality vitreous 
china with punching for gooseneck spout. Set rim 864 mm (34 inches) 
above finished floor. 

1. Faucet: Solid cast brass construction, chrome plated, gooseneck spout 
with outlet 102 mm to 127 mm (4 inches to 5 inches) above rim. 
Electronic sensor operated, 102 mm (4 inches) center set mounting, 
wiring box 120/24 volt solenoid back check valves and inline filter. 
Provide laminar flow control device. Breaking the light beam shall 
activate the water flow. Flow shall stop when user moves away from 
light beam. All connecting wiring between transformer, solenoid valve 
and sensor shall be cut to length with no excess hanging or wrapped 
up wiring allowed. 

2. Drain: Cast or wrought brass with flat grid strainer with offset 
tailpiece, brass, chrome plated. 

3. Stops: Angle type. See paragraph 2.2.Stops 

4. Trap: Cast copper alloy, 38 mm by 32 mm (1 1/2 inches by 1 1/4 
inches)P-trap. Adjustable with connected elbow and 17 gage tubing 
extension to wall. Exposed metal trap surface and connection hardware 
shall be chrome plated with a smooth bright finish. Set trap parallel 
to wall. 

5. Provide cover for drain, stops and trap per A.D.A 4-19.4. 

E. (P-420) Lavatory (Sensor Control, Counter Mounted ASME/ANSI A112.19.2M, 
Figure 25) vitreous china, self-rimming, approximately 483 mm (19 
inches) in diameter with punching for faucet on 102 mm (4 inches) 
centers. Mount unit in countertop. Support countertop with ASME/ANSI 
A112.19.1M, Type 1, chair carrier with exposed arms. 

1. Faucet: Brass, chrome plated, gooseneck spout with outlet 102 mm to 
127 mm (4 inches to 5 inches) above rim. Electronic sensor operated, 


102 mm (4 inches) center set mounting, wiring box 120/24 volt 
solenoid back check valves and inline filter. Provide laminar flow 
control device. Breaking the light beam shall activate the water 
flow. Flow shall stop when user moves away from light beam. All 
connecting wiring between transformer, solenoid valve and sensor 
shall be cut to length with no excess hanging or wrapped up wiring 
allowed. 

2. Drain: Cast or wrought brass with flat grid strainer, offset 
tailpiece, chrome plated. Set trap parallel to wall. 

3. Stops: Angle type. See paragraph 2.2.Stops 

4. Trap: Cast copper alloy, 38 mm by 32 mm (1 1/2 inches by 1 1/4 
inches)P-trap, adjustable with connected elbow and 1.4 mm thick (17 
gauge) tubing extension to wall. Set trap parallel to the wall. 
Exposed metal trap surface and connection hardware shall be chrome 
plated with a smooth bright finish. 

5. Provide cover for drain, stops and trap per A.D.A 4-19.4. 

2.9 SINKS AND LAUNDRY TUBS 

A. Dimensions for sinks and laundry tubs are specified, length by width 
(distance from wall) and depth. 

B. (P-502) Service Sink (Corner, Floor Mounted) stain resistant terrazzo, 
711 mm by 711 mm by 305 mm (28 inches by 28 inches by 12 inches) with 
152 mm (6 inches) drop front. Terrazzo, composed of marble chips and 
white Portland cement, shall develop compressive strength of 20684 kPa 
(3000 psi) seven days after casting. Provide extruded aluminum cap on 
front side. 

1. Faucet: Solid brass construction, combination faucet with replaceable 
monel seat, removable replacement unit containing all parts subject 
to wear, integral stops, mounted on wall above sink. Spout shall have 
a pail hook, 19 mm (3/4 inch) hose coupling threads, vacuum breaker, 
and top or bottom brace to wall. Four-arm handles on faucets shall be 
cast, formed, or drop forged copper alloy. Escutcheons shall be 
either forged copper alloy or CRS. Exposed metal parts, including 
exposed part under valve handle when in open position, shall have a 
smooth bright finish. Provide 914 mm (36 inches) hose with wall hook. 
Centerline of rough in is 1219 mm (48 inches) above finished floor. 

2. Drain: Seventy six millimeter (3 inches) cast brass drain with nickel 
bronze strainer. 

3. Trap: P-trap, drain through floor. 

C. (P-505) Clinic Service Sink (Flushing Rim, Wall Hung) approximately 508 
mm by 635 mm (20 inches by 25 inches) by 203 mm (8 inches) deep. Support 
with ASME/ANSI A112. 6.1M chair carrier and secure with 10 mm (3/8 inch) 


bracket studs and nuts. Set sink with rim 762 mm (30 inches) above 
finished floor. Provide 762 mm (30 inches) CRS drainboard where 
required, without corrugations and with heavy duty CRS brackets. 

1. Faucet: Elbow control, wall hung, integral stops, single spout with 
19 mm (3/4 inch) hose threaded outlet and pail hook, vacuum breaker 
and brace to wall. Outlet 356 mm to 381 mm (14 inches to 15 inches) 
from wall. Exposed metal parts shall be chromium plated with a smooth 
bright finish. Provide laminar flow control device. 

2. Flush valve: Large diaphragm, semi-red brass body, Foot pedal 
operated, exposed chromium plated flush valve with screwdriver back 
check straight stop with cap, union outlet, street ells, elevated 
high pressure vacuum breaker, casing cover, 32 mm (1 1/4 inches) 
elbow flush connection from finished wall to 38 mm (1 1/2 inches) top 
spud. Spud coupling, wall and spud flanges. 

3. Bed Pan Washer: Mechanical pedal mixing valve, wall hung, with double 
self-closing pedal valve with loose key stops, renewable seats and 
supply from valve to nozzle with wall hook hose connection; 1219 mm 
(48 inches) of heavy duty rubber hose, with extended spray outlet 
elevated vacuum breaker, indexed lift up pedals having clearance of 
not more than 13 mm (1/2 inch) above the floor and not less than 356 
mm (14 inches) from wall when in operation. Supply pipe from wall to 
valve stop shall be rigid, threaded, IPS copper alloy pipe. Exposed 
metal parts shall be chromium plated with a smooth bright finish. 
Provide valve plate for foot control. Provide inline laminar flow 
control device. 


PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Fixture Setting: Opening between fixture and floor and wall finish shall 
be sealed as specified under Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

B. Supports and Fastening: Secure all fixtures, equipment and trimmings to 
partitions, walls and related finish surfaces. Exposed heads of bolts 
and nuts in finished rooms shall be hexagonal, polished chrome plated 
brass with rounded tops. 

C. Through Bolts: For free standing marble and metal stud partitions refer 
to Section 10 21 13, TOILET COMPARTMENTS. 

D. Toggle Bolts: For hollow masonry units, finished or unfinished. 

E. Expansion Bolts: For brick or concrete or other solid masonry. Shall be 
6 mm (1/4 inch) diameter bolts, and to extend at least 76 mm (3 inches) 
into masonry and be fitted with loose tubing or sleeves extending into 
masonry. Wood plugs, fiber plugs, lead or other soft metal shields are 
prohibited. 


F. Power Set Fasteners: May be used for concrete walls, shall be 6 mm (1/4 
inch) threaded studs, and shall extend at least 32 mm (1 1/4 inches) 
into wall. 

G. Tightly cover and protect fixtures and equipment against dirt, water and 
chemical or mechanical injury. 

H. Where water closet waste pipe has to be offset due to beam interference, 
provide correct and additional piping necessary to eliminate relocation 
of water closet. 

I. Do not use aerators on lavatories and sinks. 

3.2 CLEANING 

 At completion of all work, fixtures, exposed materials and equipment 
shall be thoroughly cleaned. 

3.3 COMMISSIONING 

A. Provide commissioning documentation in accordance with the requirements 
of Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS for all 
inspection, startup, and contractor testing required above and required 
by the System Readiness Checklist provided by the Commissioning Agent. 

B. Components provided under this section of the specification will be 
tested as part of a larger system. Refer to Section 22 08 00, 
COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS and related sections for contractor 
responsibilities for system commissioning. 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 22 62 00 
VACUUM SYSTEMS FOR LABORATORY AND HEALTHCARE FACILITIES 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Central Laboratory and Healthcare Vacuum Systems: This section 
describes the labor, equipment, and services necessary for and 
incidental to the installation of piped medical vacuum systems and 
medical vacuum and waste anesthesia gas disposal systems (WAGD). 
Medical vacuum and WAGD systems shall be installed started, tested, and 
ready for use. The scope of work shall include all necessary piping, 
fittings, valves, cabinets, station outlets and inlets, rough ins, 
ceiling services, gages, alarms including low voltage wiring, vacuum 
pumps, electric motors and starters, receivers, and all necessary 
parts, accessories, connections and equipment. Match existing station 
inlet terminal connections. 

B. The contractor shall provide all elements and accessories required for 
a complete system according to the most recent edition of NFPA 99C, Gas 
and Vacuum Systems. 

C. All necessary connections to owner furnished equipment shall be made as 
indicated on the documents. A separate construction isolation valve 
shall be made at the point of connection to an existing vacuum system. 

D. Electrical power and control wiring for vacuum pump(s), WAGD 
Producer(s), ceiling columns, alarms wiring from equipment to alarm 
panels, and modular accessories associated with the system(s) shall be 
included. 

E. Pressure testing, cross connection testing and final testing per NFPA 
99 most recent edition and using procedures shall be performed. 

F. Coordinate with owner retained verifier for final verification of the 
systems. Make corrections as required, including additional testing if 
necessary to attain full and unqualified certification. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING: Sealing around pipe penetrations to 
maintain the integrity of time rated construction. 

B. Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS: Sealing around pipe penetrations 
through the floor to prevent moisture migration. 

C. Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING: General 
requirements and items common to more than one section of Division 22. 


D. Section 23 09 23, DIRECT-DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC: Alarm 
interface with ECC. 

E. Section 26 05 33, RACEWAY AND BOXES FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS: Conduit. 

F. Section 26 05 21, LOW-VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLES 
(600 VOLTS AND BELOW): Control wiring. 

G. Section 26 27 26, WIRING DEVICES: Electrical wiring and accessories. 

H. Section 22 05 12, GENERAL MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR PLUMBING EQUIPMENT: 
Electric motors. 

I. Section 26 29 11, LOW-VOLTAGE MOTOR STARTERS: Motor starters. 

J. Section 10 25 13, PATIENT BED SERVICE WALLS: Prefabricated bedside 
patient units. 

K. Section 22 63 00, GAS SYSTEMS FOR LABORATORY AND HEALTHCARE FACILITIES: 
Laboratory and Healthcare Gases and Vacuum Alarms. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Installation and Start-up: The manufacturer will provide factory 
authorized representatives to review installation and perform initial 
start up of system. 


B. Contractor shall include with submittals an affidavit attesting to 
compliance with all relevant paragraphs of NFPA 99 most recent edition. 
Personnel assembling medical vacuum and WAGD system shall meet NFPA 99 
5.1.10.10.11 “Qualification of Installers” and hold medical gas 
endorsements as under ASSE 6010. The Contractor shall furnish 
documentation attesting that all installed piping materials were 
purchased cleaned and complied with the requirements of NFPA 99 
5.1.10.1 and 5.1.10.2. Electrical Control systems and Medical vacuum 
Alarms are to be UL listed as assemblies with label affixed. Medical 
vacuum and WAGD controls are to be wired in accordance with NEC. 

C. Equipment Installer: The equipment installer shall show documentation 
proving that the personnel installing the equipment meet the standards 
set by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) 6010 
Professional Qualification Standards for Medical Gas System Installers. 
Show technical qualifications and previous experience in installing 
medical gas equipment on three similar projects. Submit names and 
addresses of referenced projects. The equipment install shall perform 
the following coordination functions: 

1. Coordinate with other trades to ensure timely installations and 
avoid conflicts and interferences. 



2. Work with the metal stud partition installer and/or mason to ensure 
anchors, sleeves and similar items are provided in sufficient time 
to avoid delays; chases and openings are properly sized and 
prepared. 
3. Coordinate with VA to ensure medical vacuum inlets, whether owner 
supplied or contractor supplied, in walls, ceiling and all equipment 
is provided by the same Medical Vacuum Equipment Manufacturer 
satisfactory to the owner. 
4. The contractor shall coordinate with the Medical Vacuum System 


Verifier to deliver a complete, tested medical gas installation 
ready for owner’s use. 

D. Equipment Supplier: The Equipment supplier shall demonstrate evidence 
of installing equivalent product at three installations similar to this 
project that has been in satisfactory and efficient operation for three 
years. Names and addresses where the product is installed shall be 
submitted for verification. 

E. Medical Gas System Testing Organization: The Medical vacuum verifier 
shall show documentation proving that the medical gas verifier meet the 
standards set by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) 6010 
Professional Qualification Standards for Medical Gas System Verifiers. 
The testing shall be conducted by a party technically competent and 
experienced in the field of medical gas pipeline testing. Such testing 
shall be performed by a party other than the installing contractor. 

F. Names of three projects where testing of vacuum systems has been 
performed by the testing agency shall be provided. The name of the 
project, names of such persons at that project who supervised the work 
for the project owner, or who accepted the report for the project 
owner, and a written statement that the projects listed required work 
of similar scope to that set forth in this specification shall be 
included in the documentation. 

G. The testing agency's detailed procedure which will be followed in the 
testing of this project shall be submitted. In the testing agency’s 
procedure documentation, include details of the testing sequence, 
procedures for cross connection tests, outlet function tests, alarm 
tests, purity tests, etc., as required by this specification. For 
purity test procedures, data on test methods, types of equipment to be 
used, calibration sources and method references shall be submitted. 


H. Installation and Start-up: The manufacturer shall provide factory 
authorized representatives to review the installation and perform the 
initial startup of the system. The factory authorized representatives 
shall submit a report to the Contracting Officer Representative and to 
the Contractor. The Contractor shall make all corrections identified 
by the factory authorized representative. 

I. Certification: The Final inspection documentation shall include all 
test results, the names of individuals performing work for the testing 
agency on this project, detailed procedures followed for all tests, and 
a certification that all results of tests were within limits allowed by 
this specification. 

J. The installing contractor shall maintain as-built drawings of each 
completed phases for verification; and, shall provide the complete set 
at the time of final systems certification testing, for certification 
by the Third Party Testing Company. As-built drawings shall be 
provided, and a copy of them on Auto-Cad version (R-14 or later) 
provided on compact disk. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit as one package in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP 
DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Complete specifications for the product intended to be installed, 
dimensional drawings, and wiring schematics. 

2. Package drawing indicating package style, dimensions when complete, 
method of disassembly and sizes of subsections for rigging and 
installation. 

3. Piping. 

4. Valves. 

5. Inlet and outlet cocks 

6. Valve cabinets. 

7. Gages. 

8. Station inlets, and rough in assemblies. 

9. Ceiling services. 

10. Alarm controls and panels. 

11. Vacuum switches. 

12. Vacuum bottle brackets. 

13. Vacuum pump systems (Provide certified pump test data at start up): 

a. Pumps: Manufacturer and model. 


b. Pump performance curves. 

c. Pump operating speed (RPM). 

d. Capacity: Free air exhaust from 65 and 80 kPa (19 and 24 inches 
Hg.) gage vacuum (L/s) (SCFM). 

e. Capacity: Expanded air capacity at 65 and 80 kPa (19 and 24 
inches Hg.) gage vacuum (L/s) (SCFM). 

f. Type of bearing in pump. 

g. Type of lubrication. 

h. Type and adjustment of drive. 

i. Electric motors: Manufacturer, frame and type. 

j. Speed of motors (RPM). 

k. Current characteristics and horsepower of motors. 

l. Receiver capacity and rating. 

m. Silencers: Manufacturer, type and model. 

C. Station Inlets: A letter from manufacturer shall be submitted stating 
that inlets are designed and manufactured to comply with NFPA 99. Inlet 
shall bear label of approval as an assembly, of Underwriters 
Laboratories, Inc., or Associated Factory Mutual Research Corporation. 
In lieu of above labels, certificate may be submitted by a nationally 
recognized independent testing laboratory, satisfactory to the 
Contracting Officer, certifying that materials, appliances and 
assemblies conform to published standards, including methods of tests, 
of above organizations. 

D. Certification: The completed systems have been installed, tested, 
purged and analyzed in accordance with the requirements of this 
specification. Certification shall be submitted to Contracting Officer 
Representative. 

E. A notarized affidavit from the verifier stating that the verifier 
undertakes to verify this project and thus agrees to disqualify 
themselves from supplying any equipment which will be included in the 
scope of their verification. No verifier who supplies equipment shall 
be permitted to verify that equipment. Statement declaring that the 
vacuum system manufacturer has no fiduciary interest in the verifier 
and that the verifier is not an agent or representative of the vacuum 
system manufacturer. Statement declaring that the contractor has no 
fiduciary interest in the third party verifier and that the third party 
verifier has no fiduciary interest in the contractor. 


1.5 TRAINING 

A. The services of a competent instructor shall be provided for not less 
than two four-hour periods for instructing medical personnel in the 
operation and maintenance of the vacuum systems, on the dates requested 
by COR (Contracting Officer Representative). 

B. The other training requirements specified in Section 01 00 00, GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS shall be coordinated with the above paragraph 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the test by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American National Standards Institute (ANSI): 

A13.1-2007..............Scheme for Identification of Piping Systems 

B16.22-01 (R2005).......Wrought Copper and Bronze Solder-Joint Pressure 
Fittings 

B40.1-(2005)............ Pressure Gauges and Gauge Attachments 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

B819-00 (R2006).........Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Tube 
for Medical Gas Systems 

D. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

Section IX-10...........Welding and Brazing Qualifications 

E. American Welding Society (AWS): 

AWS A5.8/A5.8M-11.......Brazing Filler Metal 

AWS B2.2/B2.2M-10.......Standard for Brazing Procedure and Performance 
Qualification (Modified per NFPA 99) 

F. Compressed Gas Association (CGA): 

P-9-08..................Inert Gases Argon, Nitrogen and Helium 

G. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA): 

ICS-6-1993 (R 2006).....Industrial Controls and Systems Enclosures 

H. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

99-2012.................Health Care Facilities with 2005 errata 

I. National Electrical Code 70, edition (2011) 

J. United States Pharmacopoeia XXI/National Formulary XVI (USP/NF) 

K. Manufacturing Standardization Society (MSS): 

MSS-SP-72-99............Ball Valves With Flanged or Butt Welding For 
General Purpose 

MSS-SP-110-96...........Ball Valve Threaded, Socket Welding, Solder 
Joint, Grooved and Flared Ends 


MSS-SP-73-03............Brazing Joints for Copper and Copper Alloy 
Solder Pressure Fittings 

1.7 WARRANTY 

A. Warranty will be expressly complete, include all components of the 
system and be the responsibility of the vacuum system manufacturer of 
record only. Warranties limiting the responsibility of the vacuum 
system for any system component or which pass through to another 
manufacturer are not acceptable. 

B. Warranties shall include on site repairs including travel, labor and 
parts. Warranties requiring return of equipment for adjustment are not 
acceptable. 

1.8. MAINTENANCE SUPPORT 

A. The medical vacuum equipment manufacturer shall demonstrate a national 
factory direct service capability able to perform major overhauls. The 
medical vacuum equipment manufacturer shall provide factory direct 
preventative maintenance contract. The medical vacuum equipment 
manufacturer shall provide formal maintenance training courses. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 GENERAL PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS 

A. One Medical Vacuum Equipment Manufacturer shall supply the medical 
vacuum system(s) and equipment to include outlets, valves and gauges, 
valve boxes, alarm panels, manifolds, medical air, instrument air, 
vacuum and WAGD sources. 

2.2 PIPING 

A. Copper Tubing: Copper tubing shall be type "K" or "L", ASTM B819, 
seamless copper tube, hard drawn temper, with wrought copper fittings 
conforming to ANSI B16.22 or brazing fittings complying with MSS SP-73. 
The copper tubing size designated reflects nominal inside diameter. All 
tubing and fittings shall be labeled "ACR/OXY", "OXY", "OXY/MED", 
"ACR/MED", or "MED". 

B. Brazing Alloy: The brazing alloy shall comply with AWS A5.8, 
Classification BCuP, greater than 537 .C (1000 .F) melting temperature. 
Flux shall be strictly prohibited for copper to copper connections. 

C. Screw Joints: Screw joints shall use polytetrafluoroethylene (teflon) 
tape. 

D. Use only copper or stainless steel pipes for discharge from vacuum 
product (exhaust pipes). 

E. Memory metal couplings shall have temperature and pressure ratings not 
less than that of a brazed joint. 


F. Piping identification labels shall be applied at time of installation 
in accordance with current NFPA. Supplementary color identification 
shall be in accordance with CGA Pamphlet C-9. 

G. Special Fittings: The following special fittings shall be permitted to 
be used in lieu of brazed joints: 

1. Memory-metal couplings having temperature and pressure ratings 
joints not less than that of a brazed joint. 

2. Listed or approved metallic gas tube fittings that, when made up, 
provide a permanent joint having the mechanical, thermal, and 
sealing integrity of a brazed joint. 

3. Dielectric fittings where required by the manufacturer of special 
medical equipment to electrically isolate the equipment from the 
piping distribution system. 

4. Axially swaged, elastic strain preload fittings providing metal to 
metal seal having pressure and temperature ratings not less than 
that of a brazed joint and when complete are permanent and nonseparable. 


2.3 EXPOSED LABORATORY AND HEALTHCARE VACUUM PIPING 

A. Finished Room: Use full iron pipe size chrome plated brass piping shall 
be used for exposed laboratory and healthcare vacuum piping connecting 
fixtures, casework, cabinets, equipment and reagent racks when not 
concealed by apron including those furnished by the Government or 
specified in other sections. 

1. Pipe: Fed. Spec. WW-P-351, standard weight. 

2. Fittings: Fittings shall comply with ANSI B16.15 cast bronze 
threaded fittings with chrome finish, (125 and 250). 

3. Nipples: Nipples shall comply with ASTM B 687, Chromium-plated. 

4. Unions: Unions shall comply with Mss SP-72, SP-110, Brass or Bronze 
with chrome finish. Unions 65 mm (2-1/2 inches) and larger shall be 
flange type with approved gaskets. 

5. Valves: Valves shall comply with Mss SP-72, SP-110, Brass or bronze 
with chrome finish. 

2.4 VALVES 

A. Ball: Ball valves shall be in line, other than zone valves in cabinets. 

1. Sixty five millimeter or DN65 (2-1/2 inches) and smaller: Ball 
valves shall be bronze/ brass body, Fed. Spec. MSS SP72 & SP 110 , 
Type II, Class 150, Style 1, with tubing extensions for brazed 
connections, full ported, three piece or double union end 


connections, teflon seat seals, full flow, 4125 kPa (600 psi) WOG 
minimum working pressure, with locking type handle. 2. Eighty 
millimeter or DN80 to 100 millimeter or DN100 (3” to 4” inches): 
Ball valves shall be bronze/ brass body, Fed. Spec. MSS SP72 & SP 
110, Type II, Class 150, Style 1 with tubing extensions brazed to 
flanges, full ported, three piece, double seal, teflon seals, full 
flow, 4125 kPa (600 psi) WOG minimum working pressure, with locking 
type handle. 

B. Check: 

1. Check valves eighty millimeters (DN80) (3 inches) and smaller: brass 
and Bronze body, straight through design for minimum pressure drop, 
spring loaded, self aligning with teflon cone seat, vibration free, 
silent operation, supplied NPT female threads at each end with flow 
direction arrow permanently cast into, 2750 kPa (400 psi) WOG 
minimum working pressure. 

2. One hundred millimeter or DN100 (4 inches) and larger check valves 
shall be iron body, bronze trim, swing type, vertical or horizontal 
installation, flange connection, 1025 kPa (150 psi) WSP. 

C. Zone valve in cabinet shall be ball valve with bronze/ brass body, 
double seal, three piece or double union end connections, replaceable 
teflon seat seals, teflon stem seal, 4125 kPa (600 psi) WOG, cold, non 
shock gas working pressure or vacuum service to 29 inch Hg, blowout 
proof stem, one quarter turn of handle to completely open or close. 
Tubing extensions, factory brazed, pressure tested, cleaned for oxygen 
service shall be provided. A 3 mm (1/8 inches) NPT gauge port shall be 
provided for a 50mm (2 inch) diameter monitoring gauge downstream of 
the shut off valve. Zone valves shall be securely attached to the 
cabinet and provided with type-K copper tube extensions for making 
connection to system piping outside the cabinet. Zone valves shall be 
products of one manufacturer, and uniform throughout in pattern, 
overall size and appearance. Trim with color coded plastic inserts or 
color coded stick on labels. Valves shall be in cabinets such that 
cover window cannot be in place when any valve is in the closed 
position. Color coding for identification plates and labels is as 
follows: 

 

SERVICE LABEL 

IDENTIFICATION COLORS 

MFG. STD. 
CLR. 




SERVICE LABEL 

IDENTIFICATION COLORS 

MFG. STD. 
CLR. 

MEDICAL 
VACUUM 

Black letters on white background 

WHITE 

Evacuation 
(Waste Gas) 

White letters on purple background 

PURPLE 



 

2.5 VALVE CABINETS 

A. Valve cabinets shall be flush mounted, commercially available item for 
use with medical gas services, constructed from steel not lighter than 
1.3 mm (18 gage) steel or extruded aluminum not lighter than 1.9 mm (14 
gage). The valve cabinets shall be rigidly assembled, of adequate size 
to accommodate all valve(s) and fittings indicated. Holes shall be 
predrilled to receive pipe connections. These pipe connections shall 
be made outside of the valve box. Anchors shall be provided to secure 
cabinet to wall construction. Openings in cabinet shall be sealed to be 
dust tight. Bottom of cabinet shall be located 1375 mm (4 foot 6 
inches) above finished floor. 

B. Engraved rigid plastic identification plate shall be mounted on the 
wall above or adjacent to the cabinet. Color code identification plate 
to match gas identification colors as indicated above. Identification 
plate shall be clearly visible at all times. Inscriptions shall be 
provided on plate to read in substance: "VALVE CONTROL SUPPLY TO 
ROOMS." The final wording must be approved by the VA project manager. 

C. Cover plate: The cover plate shall be fabricated from 1.3 mm (18 gage) 
sheet metal with satin chromed finish, extruded anodized aluminum, or 
.85 mm (22 gage) stainless steel. A cover window shall be provided of 
replaceable plastic, with a corrosion resistant device or lever secured 
to window for emergency window removal. The following shall be 
permanently painted or stenciled on window: "FOR EMERGENCY SHUT-OFF 
VALVES ONLY, SHUT OFF VALVES FOR PIPED GASES", or equivalent wording. 
The valve cabinet shall be configured such that it is not possible to 
install window with any valve in the closed position. Each valve shall 
have a pressure gauge upstream of valve and this pressure gage shall be 
inside valve box. 

D. Cabinets and isolation valves shall be located and piped as shown, and 
at a minimum, so as to allow the isolation of each smoke compartment 
separately. Each cabinet shall serve no more than one smoke 
compartment. 


2.6 GAGES 

A. Vacuum Gages: 

1. For vacuum line adjacent to source equipment the vacuum gages shall 
comply with ANSI B40.1, vacuum gage type, size 115 mm (4-1/2 
inches), gage listed for vacuum, accurate to within 2-1/2 percent, 
with metal case. The vacuum gage range shall be 0 to-100 kPa (0-30 
inches Hg). Dial graduations and figures shall be black on a white 
background, or white on a black background. Label shall be for 
vacuum service. A gage cock shall be installed. Compound gages 
shall be installed for Vacuum system. 

2. For vacuum service upstream of main shutoff valve: A 40 mm (1-1/2 
inches) diameter gage shall be provided with steel case, bourdon 
tube and brass movement, dial range 0 to -100 kPa (0-30 inches Hg). 
Compound gages shall be provided for Vacuum system. 

2.7 STATION INLETS 

A. Vacuum Station inlets: 

1. Station inlets shall be for designated service, consisting of a 
quick coupler, quick disconnect type with inlet supply tube. 

2. The outlet station shall be made, cleaned, and packaged to NFPA 99 
standards and shall be UL listed and CSA certified. 

3. A coupler shall be provided that is non-interchangeable with other 
services, and leak proof under three times normal working pressure. 

4. Each station inlet shall be equipped with an automatic valve to 
conform with NFPA 99. Valves shall be placed in the assembly to 
provide easy access after installation for servicing and 
replacement, and to facilitate line blow-out, purging, and testing. 

5. Each inlet shall be securely fastened to rough-in to prevent 
floating and provide each with a capped stub length of 6 mm (1/4 
inches) (10 mm outside diameter) (3/8 inches outside diameter) 
tubing for connection to supply tubing. Stub tubing shall be labeled 
for appropriate service. Rough in shall be indexed and gas 
specified latch vale with non-interchangeable safety keying with 
color coded gas service identification. 

6. Rough-in kits and test plugs for Prefabricated Bedside Patient Units 
(PBPU) shall be furnished under this specification but installed by 
manufacturer of PBPUs before initial test specified herein. 

7. Completion kits (valve body and face plate) shall be installed for 
the remainder of required tests. 


B. For Ceiling Hose Drops: 

1. Brass, stainless steel or chromed metal non interchangeable DISS 
connections for appropriate service to conform with CGA V-5. 

2. Hose assemblies shall be furnished for all ceiling stations for the 
finished ceiling height as indicated on the drawings. Each hose 
shall be provided with a heavy chain type dual retractor for vacuum. 
Retractors made of stainless steel are not acceptable. An extra 450 
millimeters (18 inches) of hose length shall be provided for 
retractors. 

3. Each station inlet shall be equipped with an automatic valve to 
conform with NFPA 99. Valves shall be placed in the assembly to 
provide easy access after installation, for servicing and 
replacement, and to facilitate line blow-out, purging, and testing. 

2.8 VACUUM SWITCHES 

A. Vacuum switches shall be general purpose, contact or mercury type, 
allowing both high and low set points, with contact type provided with 
a protective dust cover. The vacuum switch shall have an adjustable 
range set by inside or outside adjustment. Vacuum switches shall 
activate when indicated by alarm requirements. One orifice nipple (or 
DISS demand check valve) shall be used for each sensor switch. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. All installation shall be performed in strict accordance with NFPA 99 
5.1.10. Brazing procedures shall be as detailed in NFPA 99 5.1.10.5. 
Brazing shall be performed only by brazers qualified under NFPA 99 
5.1.10.10.11. Where piping runs underground, the installation shall be 
made in accordance with NFPA 99 5.1.10.10.5. 

B. Contractor shall furnish 102 mm (4 inches) high concrete housekeeping 
pads. The contractor shall furnish inertia bases in lieu of 
housekeeping pads where the equipment installed is not factory isolated 
by the manufacturer. Anchor bolts shall be cast into bases 

C. Cast escutcheon shall be installed with set screw at each wall, floor 
and ceiling penetration in exposed finished locations and within 
cabinets and millwork. 

D. Open ends of tube shall be capped or plugged at all times or otherwise 
sealed until final assembly. 

E. Piping shall be cut square and accurately with a tube cutter (sawing 
not permitted) to measurements determined at place of installation. the 
tubing shall be reamed to remove burrs, being careful not to expand 


tube, and so no chips of copper remain in the tube. The tubing shall 
be worked into place without springing or forcing. The tubing shall be 
bottomed in socket so there are no gaps between tube and fitting. Care 
shall be exercised in handling equipment and tools used in cutting or 
reaming of tube to prevent oil or grease from being introduced into the 
tubing. Where contamination has occurred, material shall be no longer 
suitable for vacuum service and new, sealed tube sections used.. 

F. Piping shall be supported with pipe trays or hangers at intervals as 
shown on the drawings or as defined in NFPA 99 Table 5.1.10.10.4.5. 
Piping shall not be supported by other piping. Isolation of copper 
piping from dissimilar metals shall be of a firm, positive nature. Duct 
tape is not acceptable as an isolation material.. 

G. Valves and other equipment shall be rigidly supported to prevent strain 
on tube or joints. 

H. Piping exposed to physical damage shall be protected. 

I. During any brazing operation, the interior of the pipe shall be purged 
continuously with oil free, dry nitrogen NF, following the procedure in 
NFPA 99 5.1.10.5.5. At the completion of any section, all open pipe 
ends shall be capped using an EXTERNAL cap. The flow of purged gas 
shall be maintained until joint is cool to touch. The use of flux is 
prohibited when making of joints between copper to copper pipes and 
fittings. 

J. Threaded joints in piping systems shall be avoided whenever possible. 
Where unavoidable, make up the male threads with 
polytetrafluorofethylene (such as Teflon) tape. Liquid sealants shall 
not be used. 

K. Tubing shall not be bent. Fittings shall be used in all change of 
direction or angle. 

L. After installation of the piping, but before installation of the outlet 
valves, blow lines clear using nitrogen NF. 

M. Ceiling column assembly shall be supported from heavy sub-mounting 
castings and furnished with the unit as part of rough in. Ceiling 
columns shall be anchored with 15 mm (1/2-inch) diameter bolts attached 
to angle iron frame supported from structural ceiling. 

N. Two 25 mm (1 inch) minimum conduits shall be provided from ceiling 
column assembly to the adjacent corridor, one for mass spectrometer 
tubing and wiring and one for monitor wiring, and for connection to 
signal cabling network. 


O. Pressure and vacuum switches, transmitter and gauges shall be installed 
to be easily accessed, and provide access panel where installed above 
plaster ceiling. Pressure switch and sensors shall be installed with 
orifice nipple between the pipe line and switches/sensors. 

P. Pipe labeling shall be applied during installation process and not 
after installation is completed. Size of legend letters shall be in 
accordance with ANSI A13.1. 

Q. After initial leakage testing is completed, the piping shall be allowed 
to remain pressurized with testing gas until testing agency performs 
final tests. 

R. Penetrations: 

1. Fire Stopping: Where pipes pass through fire partitions, fire walls, 
smoked partitions, or floors, fire stopping shall be installed that 
provides an effective barrier against the spread of fire, smoke and 
gases as specified in Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING, Clearances 
between raceways and openings with the fire stopping material shall 
be completely filled and sealed.. 

2. Water proofing: At floor penetrations, clearances shall be 
completely sealed around the pipe and made watertight with sealant 
as specified in Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

S. A vacuum gage 40mm (1 1/2 inch) diameter line shall be installed 
downstream of each zone valve in cabinets. 

T. Zone valves shall be provided in cabinets where indicated and outside 
each Operating Room and a minimum one zone valve assembly for each 18 
outlets. 

U. Piping shall be labeled with name of service, identification color and 
direction of flow. Where non-standard pressures are piped, pressure 
shall be labeled. Labels shall be placed at least once every 20 feet of 
linear run or once in each story (whichever is more frequent). A label 
shall additionally be placed immediately on each side of all wall or 
floor penetrations. Pipe labels shall be self adhesive vinyl type or 
other water resistant material with permanent adhesive colored in 
accordance with NFPA 99 Table 5.1.11 and shall be visible on all sides 
of the pipe. Each master alarm signal shall be labeled for function 
after ring out. Each zone valve shall be labeled and each area alarm 
labeled for the area of control or surveillance after test. Labels 
shall be permanent and of a type approved by the VAMC 


V. Alarms and valves shall be labeled for service and areas monitored or 
controlled. Coordinate with the VAMC for final room or area 
designations. Valves shall be labeled with name and identification 
color of the gas and direction of flow 

3.2 INSTALLER TESTING 

A. Prior to declaring the lines ready for final verification, the 
installing contractor shall strictly follow the procedures for 
verification as described in NFPA 99 5.1.12.2 and attest in writing 
over the notarized signature of an officer of the installing company 
the following; 

1. That all brazing was conducted by brazers qualified to ASSE 6010 and 
holding current medical gas endorsements. 

2. That all brazing was conducted with nitrogen purging. (Procedure per 
NFPA 99 5.1.10.5.5). 

3. That the lines have been blown clear of any construction debris 
using oil free dry nitrogen or air are clean and ready for use. 
(Procedure per NFPA 99 5.1.12.2.2). 

4. That the assembled piping, prior to the installation of any devices, 
maintained a test pressure 1 1/2 times the standard pressures listed 
in NFPA 99 Table 5.1.11 without leaks. (Procedure per NFPA 99 
5.1.12.2.3). 

5. That after installation of all devices, the pipeline was proven leak 
free for 24hours at a pressure 20% above the standard pressures 
listed in NFPA 99 Table 5.1.11. (Procedure per NFPA 99 5.1.12.2.2.6) 

6. That the systems have been checked for cross connections and none 
were found. (Procedure per NFPA 99 5.1.12.2.4) 

7. That the manufacturer has started up all medical air compressors, 
medical vacuum pumps WAGD producers, liquid oxygen system(s) and 
manifolds, and that they are in operating order. 

B. Four originals of the affidavit, shall be distributed; (1) to the 
resident engineer, (1) to the contracting officer representative, (1) 
to the general contractor and (1) to the verifier (www.mgpho.org). 

 

3.4 CONNECTION TO EXISTING LABORATORY VACUUM SYSTEM: 

A. Contactor shall test the existing system for hydrocarbons, dew point, 
etc. If problems are present, the resident engineer (RE) would notify 
the facility of the results. The facility would then make the necessary 
repairs and/ or maintenance. 


B. Double Shut-off valves shall be installed at the connection of new line 
to existing line. 

C. Time for shut-down of the existing vacuum system shall be coordinated 
with the VA medical center. 

D. Prior to any work being done, new pipeline shall be checked for 
particulate or other forms of contamination. 

E. Insure that the correct type of pipe tubing and fittings are being 
used. 

F. A spot check of the existing pipelines shall be made in the facility to 
determine the level of cleanness present. 

G. The tie-in shall be made as quickly as possible. A nitrogen purge is 
not required since this would require another opening in the pipe. 

H. After the tie-in is made and allowed to cool, slowly bleed the source 
Vacuum back into the pipeline. Test the work area for leaks with soapy 
water and repair any leaks. 

I. After all leaks, if any, are repaired and the line is fully recharged, 
perform blow down and testing. Open the zone that is closest to the 
main to the system, access the closest outlet to the work, and blow the 
main through the inlet. After the inlet blows clear into a white cloth, 
make an additional check at a zone most distant from the work. Perform 
all required current NFPA 99 tests after connection. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 22 63 00 

GAS SYSTEMS FOR LABORATORY AND HEALTHCARE FACILITIES 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Central Laboratory and Healthcare Gas Systems: Consisting of oxygen, 
nitrous oxide, nitrogen, and compressed air services; complete, ready 
for operation, including all necessary piping, fittings, valves, 
cabinets, station outlets, rough-ins, ceiling services, gages, alarms 
including low voltage wiring, nitrogen control panels, cylinder 
manifolds, air compressors, electric motors and starters, air dryers, 
filters, pressure regulators, dew point, carbon monoxide monitors and 
all necessary parts, accessories, connections and equipment. Match 
existing station outlet and inlet terminal connections. 

 B. Oxygen System: Ready for connection to outside bulk supply tank, but not 
including tank. 

C. Nitrous Oxide and Nitrogen Systems: Ready for connection to cylinders, 
but not including cylinders. 

D. Supply Lines Outside of Building (including PVC protective pipe): As 
specified in this Section. 

E. Laboratory and healthcare gas system alarm wiring from equipment to 
alarm panels. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Sealing around pipe penetrations to maintain the integrity of time rated 
construction: Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

B. Sealing around pipe penetrations through the floor to prevent moisture 
migration: Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 

C. General requirements and items common to more than one section of 
Division 22. Section 22 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR PLUMBING. 

D. Conduit: Section 26 05 33, RACEWAY AND BOXES FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS. 

E. Control wiring: Section 26 05 21, LOW-VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL POWER 

CONDUCTORS AND CABLES (600 VOLTS AND BELOW). 

F. Electrical wiring and accessories: Section 26 27 26, WIRING DEVICES. 

G. Electric motors: Section 22 05 12, GENERAL MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR 
PLUMBING EQUIPMENT. 

H. Motor starters: Section 26 29 11, LOW-VOLTAGE MOTOR STARTERS. 

I. Prefabricated bedside patient units: Section 10 25 13, PATIENT BED 
SERVICE WALLS. 

J. Vacuum Piping and Equipment: SECTION 22 62 00, VACUUM SYSTEMS FOR 
LABORATORY AND HEALTHCARE FACILITIES 

K. SECTION 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 


Requirements for commissioning, systems readiness checklist, and 
training. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Materials and Installation: In accordance with NFPA 99, (2005) and as 
specified. 

B. Equipment Installer: Show technical qualifications and previous 
experience in installing laboratory and healthcare equipment on three 
similar projects. Submit names and addresses of referenced projects. 
Installers shall meet the qualifications of ANSI/ASSE Standard 6010. 

C. Equipment Supplier: Show evidence of equivalent product installed at 
three installations similar to this project that has been in 
satisfactory and efficient operation for three years. Submit names and 
addresses where the product is installed. 

D. Laboratory and healthcare System Testing Organization: The testing shall 
be conducted by a party technically competent and experienced in the 
field of laboratory and healthcare pipeline testing. Testing and systems 
verification shall be performed by personnel meeting the qualifications 
of ANSI/ASSE Standard 6030. Such testing shall be performed by a party 
other than the installing contractor. 

E. Provide names of three projects where testing of medical or laboratory 
gases systems has been performed by the testing agency. Include the name 
of the project, names of such persons at that project who supervised the 
work for the project owner, or who accepted the report for the project 
owner, and a written statement that the projects listed required work of 
similar scope to that set forth in this specification. 

F. Submit the testing agency's detailed procedure which will be followed in 
the testing of this project. Include details of the testing sequence, 
procedures for cross connection tests, outlet function tests, alarm 
tests, purity tests, etc., as required by this specification. For purity 
test procedures, include data on test methods, types of equipment to be 
used, calibration sources and method references. 

G. Certification: Provide documentation prior to submitting request for 
final inspection to include all test results, the names of individuals 
performing work for the testing agency on this project, detailed 
procedures followed for all tests, and a certification that all results 
of tests were within limits allowed by this specification. 

H. Installing contractor shall maintain as-built drawings of each completed 
phases for verification; and, shall provide the complete set at the time 
of final systems certification testing, for certification by the Third 
Party Testing Company. As-built drawings shall be provided on prints 


and in digital format. The digital format shall be in the native CAD 
system required for the project design. Should the installing 
contractor engage the testing company to provide as-built or any portion 
thereof, it shall not be deemed a conflict of interest or breach of the 
‘third party testing company’ requirement. 

I. “Hot taps” are not permitted for operating medical oxygen systems. 
Methods for connection and extension of active and pressurized medical 
gas systems without subsequent medical gas testing and verification are 
not allowed. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit as one package in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP 
DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Piping. 

2. Valves. 

3. Inlet and outlet cocks 

4. Valve cabinets. 

5. Gages. 

6. Station outlets and rough-in assemblies. 

7. Ceiling services. 

8. Alarm controls and panels. 

9. Pressure Switches. 

10. Nitrogen control panels. 

11. Manifolds. 

12. Air compressor systems (Provide certified compressor test data at 
start-up.): 

a. Compressors: Manufacturer and model. 

b. Characteristic performance curves. 

c. Compressor operating speed (RPM). 

d. Capacity: Free air delivered at indicated pressure (L/s) (SCFM). 

e. Type of bearing in compressor. 

f. Type of lubrication. 

g. Type and adjustment of drive. 

h. Electric motors: Manufacturer, frame and type. 

i. Speed of motors (RPM). 

j. Current characteristics and horsepower of motors. 

k. Receiver capacity and rating. 

l. Air silencer: Manufacturer, type and model. 

m. Air filters: Manufacturer, type, model and capacity. 

n. Pressure regulators: Manufacturer and capacity. 


o. Dew point monitor: Manufacturer, type and model. 

p. Air dryers: Manufacturer, type, model and capacity (L/s) (SCFM). 

q. Carbon monoxide monitor manufacturer, type and model. 

C. Station Outlets: Submit letter from manufacturer stating that outlets 
are designed and manufactured to comply with NFPA 99. Outlet shall bear 
label of approval as an assembly, of Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or 
Associated Factory Mutual Research Corporation. In lieu of above labels, 
certificate may be submitted by a nationally recognized independent 
testing laboratory, satisfactory to the Contracting Officer, certifying 
that materials, appliances and assemblies conform to published 
standards, including methods of tests, of above organizations. 

D. Certification: The completed systems have been installed, tested, 
purged, analyzed and verified in accordance with the requirements of 
this specification. 

E. Completed System Readiness Checklist provided by the Commissioning Agent 
and completed by the contractor, signed by a qualified technician and 
dated on the date of completion, in accordance with the requirements of 
Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 

1.5 TRAINING 

A. Furnish the services of a competent instructor for not less than two 
four-hour periods for instructing personnel in the operation and 
maintenance of the laboratory and healthcare gas systems, on the dates 
requested by COTR. 

B. Coordinate with other requirements specified in Section 01 00 00, 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the test by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

B819-(R2006)............Seamless Copper Tube for Medical Gas Systems 

C. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

A13.1-07................Scheme for Identification of Piping Systems 

B16.22-01(R2005)........Wrought Copper and Bronze Solder-Joint Pressure 
Fittings 

B40.100 (2005) .........Pressure Gauges and Gauge Attachments Boiler and 
Pressure Vessel Code - 

Section VIII-07.........Pressure Vessels, Division I 

Section IX-07...........Welding and Brazing Qualifications 


D. American Welding Society (AWS): 

AWS A5.8-04.............Brazing Filler Metal 

AWS B2.2-91.............Standard for Brazing Procedure and Performance 
Qualification (Modified per NFPA 99) 

E. Compressed Gas Association (CGA): 

C-9-04..................Standard Color Marking of Compressed Gas 
Cylinders 

G-4.1 (2009)............Cleaning Equipment for Oxygen Service 

G-10.1(2008) ...........Nitrogen, Commodity 

P-9-01..................Inert Gases Argon, Nitrogen and Helium 

V-1-05..................Standard for Compressed Gas Cylinder Valve 
Outlet and Inlet Connections 

F. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA): 

ICS-6-93(R2006).........Industrial Controls and Systems Enclosures 

G. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

99-05...................Health Care Facilities 

H. United States Pharmacopoeia XXI/National Formulary XVI (USP/NF) 

I. Manufacturing Standardization Society (MSS): 

MSS-SP-72-99............Ball Valves With Flanged or Butt Welding For 
General Purpose 

MSS-SP-110-96...........Ball Valve Threaded, Socket Welding, Solder 
Joint, Grooved and Flared Ends 

MSS-SP-73-03............Brazing Joints for Copper and Copper Alloy 
Solder Pressure Fittings 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 PIPING AND FITTINGS 

A. Copper Tubing: Type "K", ASTM B819, seamless copper tube, hard drawn 
temper, with wrought copper fittings conforming to ASME B16.22 or 
brazing fittings complying with MSS SP-73. Size designated reflecting 
nominal inside diameter. All tubing and fittings shall be labeled 
"ACR/OXY", "OXY", "OXY/MED", "ACR/MED", or "MED". 

B. Brazing Alloy: AWS A5.8, Classification BCuP, greater than 537 .C (1000 
.F) melting temperature. Flux is strictly prohibited for 
copper-to-copper connections. 

C. Screw Joints: Polytetrafluoroethylene (teflon) tape. 

D. Underground Protective Pipe: Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC), ASTM D1785, 
Schedule 80. 

E. Memory metal couplings: Temperature and pressure rating shall not be 
less than that of a brazed joint. 


F. Apply piping identification labels at the time of installation in 
accordance with current NFPA. Apply supplementary color identification 
in accordance with CGA Pamphlet C-9. 

G. Special Fittings: The following special fittings shall be permitted to 
be used in lieu of brazed joints: 

1. Memory-metal couplings having temperature and pressure ratings joints 
not less than that of a brazed joint. 

2. Listed or approved metallic gas tube fittings that, when made up, 
provide a permanent joint having the mechanical, thermal, and sealing 
integrity of a brazed joint. 

3. Dielectric fittings where required by the manufacturer of special 
medical equipment to electrically isolate the equipment from the 
piping distribution system. 

4. Axially swaged, elastic strain preload fittings providing metal to 
metal seal having pressure and temperature ratings not less than that 
of a brazed joint and when complete are permanent and non-separable. 

2.2 EXPOSED LABORATORY AND HEALTHCARE GASES PIPING 

A. Finished Room: Use full iron pipe size chrome plated brass piping for 
exposed laboratory and healthcare gas piping connecting fixtures, 
casework, cabinets, equipment and reagent racks when not concealed by 
apron including those furnished by the Government or specified in other 
sections. 

1. Pipe: Fed. Spec. WW-P-351, standard weight. 

2. Fittings: ASME B16.15 cast bronze threaded fittings with chrome 
finish, (125 and 250 PS1 Classes). 

3. Nipples: ASTM B 687, Chromium-plated. 

4. Unions: Mss SP-72, SP-110, Brass or Bronze with chrome finish. Unions 
65 mm (2-1/2 inches) and larger shall be flange type with approved 
gaskets. 

5. Valves: Mss SP-72, SP-110, Brass or bronze with chrome finish. 

2.3 VALVES 

A. Ball: In-line, other than zone valves in cabinets: 

1. Seventy five millimeter (2 1/2 inches) and smaller: Bronze/ brass 
body, Fed. Spec. MSS SP72 & SP 110 , Type II, Class 150, Style 1, 
with tubing extensions for brazed connections, full port, three-piece 
or double union end connections, teflon seat seals, full flow, 4125 
kPa ( 600 psi) WOG minimum working pressure, with locking type 
handle, cleaned for oxygen use and labeled for intended service 

2. Eighty to one hundred millimeter (3-4 inches): Bronze/ brass body, 
Fed. Spec. MSS SP72 & SP 110, Type II, Class 150, Style 1 with 


tubing extensions brazed to flanges, full ported, three piece, double 
seal, teflon seals, full flow, 4125 kPa (600 psi) WOG minimum working 
pressure, with locking type handle, cleaned for oxygen use and 
labeled for intended service. 

B. Check: 

1. Eighty millimeter (3 inches) and smaller: Bronze/brass body, 
straight through design for minimum pressure drop, spring loaded, 
self aligning with teflon cone seat, vibration free, silent 
operation, supplied NPT female threads at each end with flow 
direction arrow permanently cast into, cleaned for oxygen use and 
labeled for intended service, 2750 kPa (400 psi) WOG minimum working 
pressure. 

2. One hundred millimeter (4 inches) and larger: Iron body, bronze trim, 
swing type, vertical or horizontal installation, flange connection, 
with flow direction arrow permanently cast into, cleaned for oxygen 
use and labeled for intended service, 1025 kPa (150 psi) WSP. 

C. Zone Valve in Cabinet: Ball valve, bronze/ brass body, double seal, 
three piece or double union end connections, replaceable teflon seat 
seals, teflon stem seal, 4125 kPa (600 psi) WOG, cold, non-shock gas 
working pressure service to 100 kPa (29 inch Hg), cleaned for oxygen use 
and labeled for intended service, blowout proof stem, one quarter turn 
of handle to completely open or close. Provide tubing extensions factory 
brazed, and pressure tested. Provide 3 mm (1/8 inch) NPT gauge port for 
a 50mm (2 inch) diameter monitoring gauge downstream of the shut off 
valve. Zone valves shall be securely attached to the cabinet and 
provided with type-K copper tube extensions for making connection to 
system piping outside the cabinet. Zone valves shall be products of one 
manufacturer, and uniform throughout in pattern, overall size and 
appearance. Trim with color coded plastic inserts or color coded 
stick-on labels. Install valves in cabinets such that cover window 
cannot be in place when any valve is in the closed position. Color 
coding for identification plates and labels is as follows: 

SERVICE LABEL 

IDENTIFICATION COLORS 

MFG. STD. 
CLR. 

OXYGEN 

White letters on green background 

GREEN 

NITROUS OXIDE 

White letters on blue background 

BLUE 

NITROGEN 

White letters on black background 

BLACK 




SERVICE LABEL 

IDENTIFICATION COLORS 

MFG. STD. 
CLR. 

MEDICAL AIR 

Black or white letters on yellow 
background 

YELLOW 

CARBON DIOXIDE 

Black or white letters on gray 
background 

GRAY 



2.4 VALVE CABINETS 

A. Flush mounted commercially available item for use with laboratory and 
healthcare services, not lighter than 1.3 mm (18 gage) steel or 1.9 mm 
(14 gage) extruded aluminum, rigidly assembled, of adequate size to 
accommodate valve(s) and fittings. Punch or drill sides to receive 
tubing. Provide anchors to secure cabinet to wall construction. Seal 
openings in cabinet to be dust tight. Locate bottom of cabinet 1375 mm 
(4 foot 6 inches) above floor. 

B. Mount engraved rigid plastic identification plate on wall above or 
adjacent to cabinet. Color code identification plate to match gas 
identification colors as indicated above. Identification plate must be 
clearly visible at all times. Provide inscriptions on plate to read in 
substance: "VALVE CONTROL SUPPLY TO ROOMS." 

C. Cover plate: Fabricate from 1.3 mm (18 gage) sheet metal with satin 
chromed finish, extruded anodized aluminum, or .85 mm (22 gage) 
stainless steel. Provide cover window of replaceable plastic, with a 
corrosion resistant device or lever secured to window for emergency 
window removal. Permanently paint or stencil on window: CAUTION-CLOSE 
ONLY IN EMERGENCY, SHUT-OFF VALVES FOR PIPED GASES", or equivalent 
wording. Configure such that it is not possible to install window with 
any valve in the closed position. Each valve shall have gauge upstream 
of valve inside valve box. 

D. Cabinets and isolation valves shall be located and piped as shown, and 
at a minimum, so as to allow the isolation of each smoke compartment 
separately. No cabinet shall serve more than one smoke compartment. 

2.5 GAGES 

A. Pressure Gages: Includes gages temporarily supplied for testing 
purposes. 

1. For line pressure use adjacent to source equipment: ASME B40.1, 
pressure gage, single, size 115 mm (4-1/2 inches), for compressed 
air, nitrogen and oxygen, accurate to within two percent, with metal 
case. Range shall be two times operating pressure. Dial graduations 
and figures shall be black on a white background, or white on a black 


background. Gage shall be cleaned for oxygen use, labeled for 
appropriate service, and marked "USE NO OIL". Install with gage cock. 

2. For all services downstream of main shutoff valve: Manufactured for 
oxygen use, labeled for the appropriate service and marked "USE NO 
OIL", 40 mm (1-1/2 inch) diameter gage with dial range 1-690 kPa 
(1-100 psi) for air service. 

2.6 STATION OUTLETS 

 For all services: Brass, stainless steel or chromed metal 
non-interchangeable DISS connections for appropriate service to conform 
with CGA V-5. Equip each station outlet with an automatic valve and a 
secondary check valve to conform with NFPA 99. Equip each station inlet 
with an automatic valve to conform with NFPA 99. Place valves in the 
assembly to provide easy access after installation, for servicing and 
replacement, and to facilitate line blow-out, purging, and testing. 
Fasten each outlet securely to outlet rough-in to prevent floating, and 
provide each outlet with a capped stub length of 6 mm (1/4-inch) (10 mm 
(3/8-inch) outside diameter) tubing for connection to supply. Label stub 
tubing for appropriate service. Adjustable to compensate for variations 
in plaster or cover thickness. Rough-in kits and test plugs for 
Prefabricated Bedside Patient Units (PBPU) are furnished under this 
specification but installed by manufacturer of PBPUs before initial 
tests specified herein. Install outlet completion kits (valve body and 
face plate) for the remainder of required tests. 

2.7 ALARMS 

 

A. Provide all low voltage control wiring, except for wiring from alarm 
relay interface control cabinet to ECC, required for complete, proper 
functioning system, in conformance with Section 26 05 21, LOW-VOLTAGE 
ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLES (600 VOLTS AND BELOW). Run wiring 
in conduit, in conformance with Section 26 05 33, RACEWAY AND BOXES FOR 
ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS. 

B. Local Alarm Functions: Provide individual local air compressor 
malfunction alarms at each compressor system main control panel. 

1. Compressor Malfunction Alarm: Each compressor system receiving any of 
the following individual signals and sends a single combined 
"compressor malfunction alarm" signal to master alarm panel. 

a. Thermal Malfunction Alarm: Functions when discharge air 
temperature exceeds 177 .C (350 .F), shutting down affected 
compressor. 


b. Lead Compressor Fails to Start: Functions when lead compressor 
fails to start when actuated, causing lag pump to start. 

c. Lag Compressor in Use: Functions when the primary or lead 
compressor in incapable of satisfying the demand. When three or 
more compressors are part of the system, the lag compressor in use 
alarm shall energize when the last compressor has been signaled to 
start. 

d. High Water Level in Receiver. (Liquid ring or water-cooled units) 

e. High Water Level in Separator (if so required). (Liquid ring unit) 

2. Desiccant Air Dryer Malfunction Alarm: Dryer receives the following 
individual signals and sends a single consolidated dryer malfunction 
alarm signal to master alarm panel. 

a. Dew Point Alarm: Functions when line pressure dew point rises 
above 4 .C (39 .F) at 380 kPa (55 psi). 

3. Vacuum Pump Malfunction Alarm: Pump system receives the following 
individual signals and sends a single consolidated pump malfunction 
alarm signal to master alarm. 

a. High Temperature Shut down Alarm: Functions when exhaust air 
temperature exceeds 104 .C (220 .F), shutting down affected pump. 

b. Lead Pump Fails to Start Alarm: Functions when lead pump fails to 
start when actuated causing lag pump to start. 

c. Lag Pump In Use Alarm: Functions when the primary or lead vacuum 
pump in incapable of satisfying the demand. When three or more 
vacuum pumps are part of the system, the lag pump in use alarm 
shall energize when the last vacuum pump has been signaled to 
start. 

4. Waste Anesthetic Gas Disposal (WASG) Lag in Use Alarm: Provide when a 
central WAGD system is used. The signal shall be manually reset. 

5. Instrument Air Dew Point High: Functions when the line pressure dew 
point is greater than -30 .C (-22 .F). 

C. Master Alarm Functions: Provide the following individual alarms at the 
master alarm panel. 

1. Oxygen Alarms: 

a. Liquid oxygen low level alarm: Functions when stored liquid oxygen 
reaches a predetermined minimum level. 

b. Reserve switchover alarm: Functions when, or just before, reserve 
oxygen supply goes in operation. 

c. Reserve low supply alarm: Functions when contents of cylinder 
reserve oxygen supply are reduced to one day's average supply; 
switch and contacts at the bulk tank control panel. 


d. Reserve low pressure alarm: Functions when the gas pressure 
available in the liquid reserve oxygen supply is reduced below the 
pressure required to function properly. 

e. Low pressure alarm: Functions when system pressure downstream of 
the main shutoff valve drops below 275 kPa (40 psi), plus/minus 14 
kPa (2 psi); operated by pressure switch or transmitters. 

f. High pressure alarm: functions when system pressure downstream of 
main shutoff valve increases above 415 kPa (60 psi), plus/minus 14 
kPa (2 psi) set points; operated by pressure switches or 
transmitters. 

g. Cylinder reserve pressure low: Functions when the content of a 
cylinder reserve header is reduced below one day’s average supply. 

2. Nitrous Oxide Alarms: 

a. Reserve switchover alarm: Functions when, or just before, 
secondary or reserve nitrous oxide supply goes in operation. 

b. Pressure alarms: Functions when system pressure downstream of main 
shutoff valve drops below 275 kPa (40 psi), plus/minus 14 kPa (2 
psi) or increases above 415 kPa (60 psi), plus/minus 14 kPa (2 
psi) set points; operated by pressure switches or transmitters. 

c. Cylinder reserve pressure low: Functions when the content of a 
cylinder reserve header is reduced below one day’s average supply. 

3. Nitrogen Alarms: 

a. Reserve switchover alarm: Functions when, or just before, 
secondary or reserve nitrogen supply goes in operation. 

b. Pressure alarms: Functions when system pressure downstream of main 
shutoff valve drops below 1310 kPa (190 psi), plus/minus 14 kPa (2 
psi) or increases above 1510 kPa (220 psi), plus/minus 14 kPa (2 
psi) set points; operated by pressure switches or transmitters. 

c. Cylinder reserve pressure low: Functions when the content of a 
cylinder reserve header is reduced below one day’s average supply. 

4. Carbon Dioxide Alarms: 

a. Reserve Switchover Alarm: Functions when, or just before, 
secondary or reserve carbon dioxide supply goes in operation. 

b. Pressure Alarms: Functions when system pressure downstream of main 
shutoff valve drops below 275 kPa (40 psi), plus/minus 14 kPa (2 
psi) or increases above 415 kPa (60 psi), plus/minus 14 kPa (2 
psi) set points; operated by pressure switches or transmitters. 

c. Cylinder reserve pressure low: Functions when the content of a 
cylinder reserve header is reduced below one day’s average supply. 

5. Compressed Air Alarms: 


a. Medical air dew point high alarm: Functions when the line pressure 
dew point rises above 2 .C (35 .F) at 380 kPa (55 psi). 

b. Carbon Monoxide Alarm: Functions when the carbon monoxide levels 
rise above 10 parts per million; receives signal from the carbon 
monoxide monitor. 

c. Main Bank Filter Set Alarm: Functions when the pressure drop 
across filter set increases more than 14 kPa (2 psi) over that 
when filters are clean and new; operates by differential pressure 
switch or transmitters. 

d. Desiccant Prefilter Alarm: Functions when pressure across the 
filter increases more than 21 kPa ( 3 psi) over that when filters 
are clean and new; operates by pressure differential switch. 

e. Desiccant Post Filter Alarm: Functions when pressure drop across 
filter increases more than 21 kPa (3 psi) over that when filters 
are clean and new; operates by pressure differential switch. 

f. Desiccant Dryer Malfunction Alarm: Functions on any combination of 
failure of tower cycling and/or pressure dew point rise above 60 ° 
C at 690 kPa (140 ° F at 100 psi). 

g. Aftercooler High temperature Alarm: Functions when aftercooler 
discharge air temperature exceeds 38 ° C (100 ° F). 

h. Pressure Abnormal Alarm: Functions when system pressure downstream 
of main shutoff valve drops below 550 kPa (80 psi) (plus/minus 
gage or increases above 830 kPa (120 psi) (plus/minus 14 kPa (2 
psi) set points; operated by pressure switch. 

i. Compressor Malfunction Alarm: Functions when compressor system 
control panel signals compressor thermal malfunction alarm, lead 
compressor fails to start alarm or high water level in receiver or 
separator (if so required) receives signal from system control 
panel. 

j. Low Lubricant Shutdown: For rotary screw compressors. Functions 
when lubricant level drops to a low point. Receives signal from 
compressor control panel. 

k. Instrument air dew point high alarm: Functions when the line 
pressure dew point rises above -30 .C (-22 .F) at 380 kPa (55 
psi). 

D. Alarm Functions: 

1. Oxygen, nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide and compressed air alarms: 
Pressure alarms: Functions when pressure in branch drops below 275 
kPa (40 psi), plus/minus 14 kPa (2 psi) or increases above 414 kPa 


(60 psi), plus/minus 14 kPa (2 psi) set points; operated by pressure 
switches or transmitters. 

2. Nitrogen alarms: Pressure alarms: Functions when pressure in branch 
drops below 1310 kPa (190 psi), plus/minus 14 kPa (2 psi) or 
increases above 1500 kPa (220 psi), plus/minus 14 kPa (2 psi) set 
points; operated by pressure switches or transmitters. 

3. Vacuum alarms: Low vacuum alarm: Functions when vacuum in branch 
drops below 40 kPa (12-inches Hg); operated by vacuum switch. 

5. Vacuum alarms: 

a. Low vacuum alarm: Function when system vacuum upstream of main 
shutoff valve drops below 40 kPa (12 inches Hg); operated by 
vacuum switch. 

b. Filter differential pressure/back pressure alarm: Functions when 
discharge oil filter differential rises to set level, or when back 
pressure is sensed; receives signal from pump control panel. 

c. Laboratory vacuum pump malfunction. 

E. Alarm Panels: 

1. General: Modular design, easily serviced and maintained; alarms 
operate on alternative current low voltage control circuit; provide 
required number of transformers for efficient functioning of complete 
system. Alarm panels shall be integral units, reporting compressed 
air and vacuum services, as required. 

2. Box: Flush mounted, sectional or one piece, corrosion protected. Size 
to accommodate required number of service functions for each 
location, and for one audible signal in each box. Anchor box 
securely. Provide spare capacity to accommodate 50% of the number of 
provided alarm points. 

3. Cover plate: Designed to accommodate required number of signals, 
visual and audible, for each location, and containing adequate 
operating instructions within the operator's view. Bezel shall be 
extruded aluminum, chromium plated metal, or plastic. Secure to the 
box with chromium plated or stainless steel countersunk screws. 

4. Service indicator lights: Red translucent plastic or LED with proper 
service identification inscribed thereon. Number of lights and 
service instruction shall be as required for each location. Provide 
each panel with a green test button of the same material, inscribed 
with "PUSH TO TEST" or similar message. 

5. Audible signal: Provide one in each alarm panel and connect 
electrically with all service indicator light functions. 

6. Controls: 


a. Visual signal: When the condition occurs which any individual 
service indicator light is to report, button for particular 
service shall give a lighted visual signal which cannot be 
canceled until such condition is corrected. 

b. Audible signal: Alarm shall give an audible signal upon circuit 
energization of any visual signal. Audible signal shall be 
continuous until silenced by pushing a button. This shall cancel 
and reset audible only, and not affect the visual signal. After 
silencing, subsequent alarms shall reactivate the audible alarm. 

c. Signal tester: Test button or separate normal light shall be 
continuously lighted to indicate electrical circuit serving each 
individual alarm is energized. Pushing test button shall 
temporarily activate all visual signals and sound audible signal, 
thereby providing desired indications of status of system. 

 

 

G. Alarm Network Communication: Network communications board shall be 
installed in local alarm and connected to the facility’s Ethernet. Local 
alarm modules shall send information to the master alarm and the data 
can be downloaded thru the computer connected to the facility’s 
Ethernet. Master alarm displays the message, sound its alarm and saves 
the information in an event log. This event log shall be downloaded to a 
computer file for tracking data and troubleshooting. 

2.8 PRESSURE SWITCHES 

 General purpose, contact or mercury type, allowing both high and low 
pressure set points, with contact type provided with a protective dust 
cover; adjustable range set by inside or outside adjustment; switches 
activate when indicated by alarm requirements. Use one orifice nipple 
(or DISS demand check valve) for each sensor or pressure switch. 

2.9 PRESSURE REGULATORS: 

A. For 690 kPa (100 psi) regulator, provide duplex in parallel, valve for 
maintenance shut-down without service interruption. For additional 
pressures, locate regulators remote from compressor near point of use, 
and provide with isolation valves and valve bypass. 

1. For systems 5 L/s (10 scfm) and below: Brass or bronze body and trim, 
reduced pressure range 170 – 850 kPa (25 – 125 psi) adjustable, 
spring type, diaphragm operated diaphragm operated, relieving. 
Delivered pressure shall vary not more than one kPa (0.15psi) for 
each 10 kPa (1.5psi) variation in inlet pressure. 


2.10 EMERGENCY LOW PRESSURE OXYGEN INLET 

A. The Low Pressure Emergency Oxygen Inlet provides an inlet for connecting 
a temporary auxiliary source of oxygen to the oxygen pipeline system for 
emergency or maintenance situations per NFPA 99. 

B. The inlet consist of a 1" (25 mm) ball valve, pressure gauge and a 
1/2"/1" NPTF connection housed in a weather tight enclosure. The 
enclosure is labeled "Emergency Low Pressure Gaseous Oxygen Inlet", and 
includes a padlock staple to prevent tampering or unauthorized access. 
The enclosure is suitable for recess mounting on the exterior of the 
building being served. The enclosure is 14 gauge, cold rolled steel with 
a primer coat of paint. The Emergency Oxygen Inlet is connected at a 
point downstream of the main supply line shutoff valve. 

C. Check valves are provided for installation in the emergency supply line 
and 'in the main supply line between the main line shutoff valve and the 
emergency supply line connection per by NFPA 99. Check valves have a 
cast bronze body and straight through design for minimum pressure drop. 

D. The check valves for sizes under 3" (76 mm) are soft seated, bubble 
tight, self aligning, and spring loaded, and ball type check valves. 
Three inch (76 mm) check valves are hard seated, spring loaded, self 
aligning ball type checks with cone seats (3" valves may not be "bubble 
tight"). Check valves are fast acting. 

E. A relief valve is provided for installation in the emergency supply line 
per NFPA 99. The relief valve has a brass body, single seat design, and 
is cleaned for oxygen use. It automatically reseats to provide a "bubble 
tight" seal after discharging excess gas. Pre-set at 75 psi. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. In accordance with current NFPA. Run buried oxygen piping in PVC 
protective pipe for entire length including enclosure of fittings and 
changes of direction. 

B. Install cast escutcheon with set screw at each wall, floor and ceiling 
penetration in exposed finished locations and within cabinets and 
millwork. 

C. Keep open ends of tube capped or plugged at all times or otherwise 
sealed until final assembly. 

D. Cut piping square and accurately with a tube cutter (sawing not 
permitted) to measurements determined at place of installation. Ream 
tube to remove burrs, being careful not to expand tube, and so no chips 
of copper remain in the tube. Work into place without springing or 
forcing. Bottom tube in socket so there are no gaps between tube and 


fitting. Exercise care in handling equipment and tools used in cutting 
or reaming of tube to prevent oil or grease being introduced into 
tubing. Where contamination has occurred, material is no longer suitable 
for oxygen service. 

E. Spacing of hangers: Current NFPA. 

F. Rigidly support valves and other equipment to prevent strain on tube or 
joints. 

G. While being brazed, joints shall be continuously purged with oil free 
nitrogen. The flow of purged gas shall be maintained until joint is cool 
to touch. 

H. Do not bend tubing. Use fittings. 

I. Support ceiling column assembly from heavy sub-mounting castings 
furnished with the unit as part of roughing-in. Anchor with 15 mm 
(1/2-inch) diameter bolts attached to angle iron frame supported from 
structural ceiling, unless otherwise indicated. 

J. Provide two 25 mm (1 inch) minimum conduits from ceiling column assembly 
to adjacent corridor, one for mass spectrometer tubing and wiring and 
one for monitor wiring, for connection to signal cabling network. 

K. Install pressure switches, transmitter and gauges to be easily accessed, 
and provide access panel where installed above plaster ceiling. Install 
pressure switch and sensors with orifice nipple between the pipe line 
and switches/sensors. 

L. Apply pipe labeling during installation process and not after 
installation is completed. Size of legend letters shall be in accordance 
with ANSI A13.1. 

M. Pipe compressor intake to a source of clean ambient air as indicated in 
current NFPA. 

N. After initial leakage testing is completed, allow piping to remain 
pressurized with testing gas until testing agency performs final tests. 

O. Penetrations: 

1. Fire Stopping: Where pipes pass through fire partitions, fire walls, 
smoked partitions, or floors, install a fire stop that provides an 
effective barrier against the spread of fire, smoke and gases as 
specified in Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING, with intumescent 
materials only. Completely fill and seal clearances between raceways 
and openings with the fire stopping material. 

2. Waterproofing: At floor penetrations, completely seal clearances 
around the pipe and make watertight with sealant as specified in 
Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS. 


P. Provide 40mm (1 1/2 inch) diameter line pressure gage downstream of zone 
valve in cabinets. 

Q. Provide zone valves in cabinets where indicated and outside each 
Operating Room and a minimum one zone valve assembly for each 18 outlet 
set. 

3.2 TESTS 

A. Initial Tests: Blow down, and high and low pressure leakage tests as 
required by current NFPA with documentation. 

3.3 CONNECTION TO EXISTING LABORATORY GAS SYSTEM: 

A. Contactor shall test the existing system for hydrocarbons, dew point, 
etc. If problems are present, the resident engineer (RE) would notify 
the facility of the results. The facility would then make the necessary 
repairs and/ or maintenance. 

B. Install shut-off valve at the connection of new line to existing line. 

C. Coordinate time for shut-down of the existing laboratory and healthcare 
system with the VA medical center. 

D. Shut off all oxygen zone valves and gas riser valves if the section to 
be connected to cannot be totally isolated from the remainder of the 
system. 

E. Prior to any work being done, check the new pipeline for particulate or 
other forms of contamination. 

F. Insure that the correct type of pipe tubing and fittings are being used. 

G. Make a spot check of the existing pipelines in the facility to determine 
the level of cleanness present. 

H. Reduce the pressure to zero and make the tie-in as quickly as possible. 
A nitrogen purge is not required since this would require another 
opening in the pipe. 

I. After the tie-in is made and allowed to cool, slowly bleed the source 
gas back into the pipeline. Test the work area for leaks with soapy 
water and repair any leaks. 

J. After all leaks, if any, are repaired and the line is fully recharged, 
perform blow down and testing. Open the zone that is closest to the main 
to the system, access the closest outlet to the work, and blow the main 
through the outlet. After the outlet blows clear into a white cloth, 
make an additional check at a zone most distant from the work. Perform 
all required current NFPA tests after connection. 


3.4 COMMISSIONING 

A. Provide commissioning documentation accordance with the requirements of 
Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS for all inspection, 


startup, and contractor testing required above and required by the 
System Readiness Checklist provided by the Commissioning Agent. 

B. Components provided under this section of the specification will be 
tested as part of a larger system. Refer to Section 22 08 00, 
COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS and related sections for contractor 
responsibilities for system commissioning. 

3.5 DEMONSTRATION AND TRAINING 

A. Provide services of manufacturer’s technical representative for four 
hours to instruct VA Personnel in operation and maintenance of units. 

B. Submit training plans and instructor qualifications in accordance with 
the requirements of Section 22 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF PLUMBING SYSTEMS. 

 

- - - E N D - - - 

 


SECTION 23 05 11 
COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. The requirements of this Section apply to all sections of Division 23. 

B. Definitions: 

1. Exposed: Piping, ductwork, and equipment exposed to view in finished 
rooms. 

2. Option or optional: Contractor's choice of an alternate material or 
method. 

3. RE: Resident Engineer 

4. COR: Contracting Officer’s Technical Representative. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 00 05 01, SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR WORK IN A VA HOSPITAL 
B. Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
C. Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, and SAMPLES 


D. Section 03 30 00, CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE: Concrete and Grout 

E. Section 05 50 00, METAL FABRICATIONS 

F. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING 

G. Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS 

H. Section 09 91 00, PAINTING 

I. Section 23 05 41, NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL FOR HVAC PIPING and 
EQUIPMENT 

J. Section 23 05 93, TESTING, ADJUSTING, and BALANCING FOR HVAC 

K. Section 23 07 11, HVAC 

L. Section 23 21 13, HYDRONIC PIPING 

 M. Section 23 31 00, HVAC DUCTS and CASINGS 

 N. Section 23 36 00, AIR TERMINAL UNITS 

 O. Section 23 37 00, AIR OUTLETS and INLETS 

 P. Section 23 82 16, AIR COILS 

 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Mechanical, electrical and associated systems shall be safe, reliable, 
efficient, durable, easily and safely operable and maintainable, easily 
and safely accessible, and in compliance with applicable codes as 
specified. The systems shall be comprised of high quality institutionalclass 
and industrial-class products of manufacturers that are 
experienced specialists in the required product lines. All construction 
firms and personnel shall be experienced and qualified specialists in 
industrial and institutional HVAC. 


B. Flow Rate Tolerance for HVAC Equipment: Section 23 05 93, TESTING, 
ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC. 

C. Equipment Vibration Tolerance: 

1. Refer to Section 23 05 41, NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL FOR HVAC 
PIPING and EQUIPMENT. Equipment shall be factory-balanced to this 
tolerance and re-balanced on site, as necessary. 

2. After HVAC air balance work is completed and permanent drive sheaves 
are in place, perform field mechanical balancing and adjustments 
required to meet the specified vibration tolerance. 

D. Products Criteria: 

1. Standard Products: Material and equipment shall be the standard 
products of a manufacturer regularly engaged in the manufacture of 
the products for at least 3 years (or longer as specified elsewhere). 
The design, model and size of each item shall have been in 
satisfactory and efficient operation on at least three installations 
for approximately three years. However, digital controls, shall be 
the current generation of technology and basic design that has a 
proven satisfactory service record of at least three years. See other 
specification sections for any exceptions and/or additional 
requirements. 

2. All items furnished shall be free from defects that would adversely 
affect the performance, maintainability and appearance of individual 
components and overall assembly. 

3. Conform to codes and standards as required by the specifications. 
Conform to local codes, if required by local authorities if the local 
codes are more stringent then those specified. Refer any conflicts to 
the Resident Engineer. 

4. Multiple Units: When two or more units of materials or equipment of 
the same type or class are required, these units shall be products of 
one manufacturer. 

5. Assembled Units: Manufacturers of equipment assemblies, which use 
components made by others, assume complete responsibility for the 
final assembled product. 

6. Nameplates: Nameplate bearing manufacturer's name or identifiable 
trademark shall be securely affixed in a conspicuous place on 
equipment, or name or trademark cast integrally with equipment, 
stamped or otherwise permanently marked on each item of equipment. 

7. Asbestos products or equipment or materials containing asbestos shall 
not be used. 

E. Equipment Service Organizations: 


1. HVAC: Products and systems shall be supported by service 
organizations that maintain a complete inventory of repair parts and 
are located within 50 miles to the site. 

F. HVAC Mechanical Systems Welding: Before any welding is performed, 
contractor shall submit a certificate certifying that welders comply 
with the following requirements: 

1. Qualify welding processes and operators for piping according to ASME 
"Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code", Section IX, "Welding and Brazing 
Qualifications". 

2. Comply with provisions of ASME B31 series "Code for Pressure Piping". 

3. Certify that each welder has passed American Welding Society (AWS) 
qualification tests for the welding processes involved, and that 
certification is current. 

G. Execution (Installation, Construction) Quality: 

1. Apply and install all items in accordance with manufacturer's written 
instructions. Refer conflicts between the manufacturer's instructions 
and the contract drawings and specifications to the Resident Engineer 
for resolution. Provide written hard copies or computer files of 
manufacturer’s installation instructions to the Resident Engineer at 
least two weeks prior to commencing installation of any item. 
Installation of the item will not be allowed to proceed until the 
recommendations are received. Failure to furnish these 
recommendations is a cause for rejection of the material. 

2. Provide complete layout drawings required by Paragraph, SUBMITTALS. 
Do not commence construction work on any system until the layout 
drawings have been approved. 

H. Upon request by Government, provide lists of previous installations for 
selected items of equipment. Include contact persons who will serve as 
references, with telephone numbers and e-mail addresses. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES, and with requirements in the individual specification 
sections. 

B. Contractor shall make all necessary field measurements and 
investigations to assure that the equipment and assemblies will meet 
contract requirements. 

C. If equipment is submitted which differs in arrangement from that shown, 
provide drawings that show the rearrangement of all associated systems. 
Approval will be given only if all features of the equipment and 
associated systems, including accessibility, are equivalent to that 
required by the contract. 


D. Prior to submitting shop drawings for approval, contractor shall certify 
in writing that manufacturers of all major items of equipment have each 
reviewed drawings and specifications, and have jointly coordinated and 
properly integrated their equipment and controls to provide a complete 
and efficient installation. 

E. Submittals and shop drawings for interdependent items, containing 
applicable descriptive information, shall be furnished together and 
complete in a group. Coordinate and properly integrate materials and 
equipment in each group to provide a completely compatible and 
efficient. 

F. Layout Drawings: 

1. Submit complete consolidated and coordinated layout drawings for all 
new systems, and for existing systems that are in the same areas. 
Refer to Section 00 72 00, GENERAL CONDITIONS, Article, SUBCONTRACTS 
AND WORK COORDINATION. 

2. The drawings shall include plan views, elevations and sections of all 
systems and shall be on a scale of not less than 1:32 (3/8-inch equal 
to one foot). Clearly identify and dimension the proposed locations 
of the principal items of equipment. The drawings shall clearly show 
locations and adequate clearance for all equipment, piping, valves, 
control panels and other items. Show the access means for all items 
requiring access for operations and maintenance. Provide detailed 
layout drawings of all piping and duct systems. 

3. Do not install ductwork or piping until layout drawings have been 
approved. 

4. In addition, for HVAC systems, provide details of the following: 

a. Hangers, inserts, supports, and bracing. 

b. Pipe sleeves. 

c. Duct or equipment penetrations of floors, walls, and ceilings. 

G. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: Submit under the pertinent section 
rather than under this section. 

1. Equipment and materials identification. 

2. Fire-stopping materials. 

3. Hangers, inserts, supports and bracing. Provide load calculations for 
variable spring and constant support hangers. 

4. Wall, floor, and ceiling plates. 

H. HVAC Maintenance Data and Operating Instructions: 

1. Maintenance and operating manuals in accordance with Section 01 00 
00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, Article, INSTRUCTIONS, for systems and 
equipment. 


2. Provide a listing of recommended replacement parts for keeping in 
stock supply, including sources of supply, for equipment. 

I. Provide copies of approved HVAC equipment submittals to the Testing, 
Adjusting and Balancing Subcontractor. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. Air Conditioning, Heating and Refrigeration Institute (AHRI): 

430-2009................Central Station Air-Handling Units 

C. American National Standard Institute (ANSI): 

B31.1-2007..............Power Piping 

D. Air Movement and Control Association (AMCA): 

410-96..................Recommended Safety Practices for Air Moving E. 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
(ASME): 

Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code (BPVC): 

Section IX-2007.........Welding and Brazing Qualifications 

 Code for Pressure Piping: 

B31.1-2007..............Power Piping 

E. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A36/A36M-08.............Standard Specification for Carbon Structural 
Steel 

A575-96(2007)...........Standard Specification for Steel Bars, Carbon, 
Merchant Quality, M-Grades 

E84-10..................Standard Test Method for Surface Burning 
Characteristics of Building Materials 

E119-09c................Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building 
Construction and Materials 

F. Manufacturers Standardization Society (MSS) of the Valve and Fittings 
Industry, Inc: 

SP-58-2009..............Pipe Hangers and Supports-Materials, Design and 
Manufacture, Selection, Application, and 
Installation 

SP 69-2003..............Pipe Hangers and Supports-Selection and 
Application 

SP 127-2001.............Bracing for Piping Systems, Seismic – Wind – 
Dynamic, Design, Selection, Application 

G. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

90A-09..................Standard for the Installation of Air 
Conditioning and Ventilating Systems 


101-09..................Life Safety Code 

1.6 DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 

A. Protection of Equipment: 

1. Equipment and material placed on the job site shall remain in the 
custody of the Contractor until phased acceptance, whether or not the 
Government has reimbursed the Contractor for the equipment and 
material. The Contractor is solely responsible for the protection of 
such equipment and material against any damage. 

2. Place damaged equipment in first class, new operating condition; or, 
replace same as determined and directed by the Resident Engineer. 
Such repair or replacement shall be at no additional cost to the 
Government. 

3. Protect interiors of new equipment and piping systems against entry 
of foreign matter. Clean both inside and outside before painting or 
placing equipment in operation. 

4. Existing equipment and piping being worked on by the Contractor shall 
be under the custody and responsibility of the Contractor and shall 
be protected as required for new work. 

B. Cleanliness of Piping and Equipment Systems: 

1. Exercise care in storage and handling of equipment and piping 
material to be incorporated in the work. Remove debris arising from 
cutting, threading and welding of piping. 

2. Piping systems shall be flushed, blown or pigged as necessary to 
deliver clean systems. 

3. Contractor shall be fully responsible for all costs, damage, and 
delay arising from failure to provide clean systems. 

1.7 JOB CONDITIONS – WORK IN EXISTING BUILDING 

A. Building Operation: Government employees will be continuously operating 
and managing all facilities, including temporary facilities, that serve 
the medical center. 

B. Maintenance of Service: Schedule all work to permit continuous service 
as required by the medical center. 

C. Phasing of Work: Comply with all requirements shown on drawings or 
specified. 

D. Building Working Environment: Maintain the architectural and structural 
integrity of the building and the working environment at all times. 
Maintain the interior of building at 18 degrees C (65 degrees F) 
minimum. Limit the opening of doors, windows or other access openings to 
brief periods as necessary. No storm water or ground water leakage 
permitted. Provide daily clean-up of construction and demolition debris 
on all floor surfaces and on all equipment being operated by VA. 


E. Acceptance of Work for Government Operation: As new facilities are made 
available for operation and these facilities are of beneficial use to 
the Government, inspections will be made and tests will be performed. 
Based on the inspections, a list of contract deficiencies will be issued 
to the Contractor. After correction of deficiencies as necessary for 
beneficial use, the Contracting Officer will process necessary 
acceptance and the equipment will then be under the control and 
operation of Government personnel. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 FACTORY-ASSEMBLED PRODUCTS 

A. Provide maximum standardization of components to reduce spare part 
requirements. 

B. Manufacturers of equipment assemblies that include components made by 
others shall assume complete responsibility for final assembled unit. 

1. All components of an assembled unit need not be products of same 
manufacturer. 

2. Constituent parts that are alike shall be products of a single 
manufacturer. 

3. Components shall be compatible with each other and with the total 
assembly for intended service. 

4. Contractor shall guarantee performance of assemblies of components, 
and shall repair or replace elements of the assemblies as required to 
deliver specified performance of the complete assembly. 

C. Components of equipment shall bear manufacturer's name and trademark, 
model number, serial number and performance data on a name plate 
securely affixed in a conspicuous place, or cast integral with, stamped 
or otherwise permanently marked upon the components of the equipment. 

D. Major items of equipment, which serve the same function, must be the 
same make and model. Exceptions will be permitted if performance 
requirements cannot be met. 

2.2 COMPATIBILITY OF RELATED EQUIPMENT 

 Equipment and materials installed shall be compatible in all respects 
with other items being furnished and with existing items so that the 
result will be a complete and fully operational plant that conforms to 
contract requirements. 

2.3 LIFTING ATTACHMENTS 

A. Provide equipment with suitable lifting attachments to enable 
equipment to be lifted in its normal position. Lifting attachments 
shall withstand any handling conditions that might be encountered, 



without bending or distortion of shape, such as rapid lowering and 
braking of load. 


2.4 EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS IDENTIFICATION 

 A. Use symbols, nomenclature and equipment numbers specified, shown on the 
drawings and shown in the maintenance manuals. Identification for piping 
is specified in Section 09 91 00. 

B. Interior (Indoor) Equipment: Engraved nameplates, with letters not less 
than 48 mm (3/16-inch) high of brass with black-filled letters, or rigid 
black plastic with white letters specified in Section 09 91 00, PAINTING 
permanently fastened to the equipment. Identify unit components such as 
coils, filters, fans, etc. 

C. Control Items: Label all temperature and humidity sensors, controllers 
and control dampers. Identify and label each item as they appear on the 
control diagrams. 

D. Valve Tags and Lists: 

1. HVAC: Provide for all valves . 

2. Valve tags: Engraved black filled numbers and letters not less than 
13 mm (1/2-inch) high for number designation, and not less than 6.4 
mm(1/4-inch) for service designation on 19 gage 38 mm (1-1/2 inches) 
round brass disc, attached with brass "S" hook or brass chain. 

3. Valve lists: Typed or printed plastic coated card(s), sized 216 
mm(8-1/2 inches) by 280 mm (11 inches) showing tag number, valve 
function and area of control, for each service or system. Punch 
sheets for a 3-ring notebook. 

4. Provide detailed plan for each floor of the building indicating the 
location and valve number for each valve. Identify location of each 
valve with a color coded thumb tack in ceiling. 

2.5 FIRESTOPPING 

 Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING specifies an effective barrier against 
the spread of fire, smoke and gases where penetrations occur for piping 
and ductwork. Refer to Section 23 07 11, HVAC, for firestop pipe and 
duct insulation. 

2.6 GALVANIZED REPAIR COMPOUND 

 Mil. Spec. DOD-P-21035B, paint form. 

2.7 HVAC PIPE AND EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS AND RESTRAINTS 

A. Vibration Isolators: Refer to Section 23 05 41, NOISE AND VIBRATION 
CONTROL FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT. 

B. Pipe Supports: Comply with MSS SP-58. Type Numbers specified refer to 
this standard. For selection and application comply with MSS SP-69. 


Refer to Section 05 50 00, METAL FABRICATIONS, for miscellaneous metal 
support materials and prime coat painting requirements. 

C. Attachment to Concrete Building Construction: 

1. Concrete insert: MSS SP-58, Type 18. 

2. Self-drilling expansion shields and machine bolt expansion anchors: 
Permitted in concrete not less than 102 mm (four inches) thick when 
approved by the Resident Engineer for each job condition. 

3. Power-driven fasteners: Permitted in existing concrete or masonry not 
less than 102 mm (four inches) thick when approved by the Resident 
Engineer for each job condition. 

D. Attachment to Steel Building Construction: 

1. Welded attachment: MSS SP-58, Type 22. 

2. Beam clamps: MSS SP-58, Types 20, 21, 28 or 29. Type 23 C-clamp may 
be used for individual copper tubing up to 23mm (7/8-inch) outside 
diameter. 

E. Attachment to Wood Construction: Wood screws or lag bolts. 

F. Hanger Rods: Hot-rolled steel, ASTM A36 or A575 for allowable load 
listed in MSS SP-58. For piping, provide adjustment means for 
controlling level or slope. Types 13 or 15 turn-buckles shall provide 38 
mm (1-1/2 inches) minimum of adjustment and incorporate locknuts. 
All-thread rods are acceptable. 

G. Hangers Supporting Multiple Pipes (Trapeze Hangers): Galvanized, cold 
formed, lipped steel channel horizontal member, not less than 41 mm by 
41 mm (1-5/8 inches by 1-5/8 inches), 2.7 mm (No. 12 gage), designed to 
accept special spring held, hardened steel nuts. Not permitted for steam 
supply and condensate piping. 

1. Allowable hanger load: Manufacturers rating less 91kg (200 pounds). 

2. Guide individual pipes on the horizontal member of every other 
trapeze hanger with 6 mm (1/4-inch) U-bolt fabricated from steel rod. 
Provide Type 40 insulation shield, secured by two 13mm (1/2-inch) 
galvanized steel bands, or preinsulated calcium silicate shield for 
insulated piping at each hanger. 

H. Supports for Piping Systems: 

1. Select hangers sized to encircle insulation on insulated piping. 
Refer to Section 23 07 11, HVAC, for insulation thickness. To protect 
insulation, provide Type 39 saddles for roller type supports or 
preinsulated calcium silicate shields. Provide Type 40 insulation 
shield or preinsulated calcium silicate shield at all other types of 
supports and hangers including those for preinsulated piping. 

2. Piping Systems except High and Medium Pressure Steam (MSS SP-58): 

a. Standard clevis hanger: Type 1; provide locknut. 


b. Riser clamps: Type 8. 

c. Wall brackets: Types 31, 32 or 33. 

d. Roller supports: Type 41, 43, 44 and 46. 

e. Saddle support: Type 36, 37 or 38. 

f. Turnbuckle: Types 13 or 15. Preinsulate. 

g. U-bolt clamp: Type 24. 

h. Copper Tube: 

1) Hangers, clamps and other support material in contact with 
tubing shall be painted with copper colored epoxy paint, 
plastic coated or taped with non adhesive isolation tape to 
prevent electrolysis. 

2) For vertical runs use epoxy painted or plastic coated riser 
clamps. 

3) For supporting tube to strut: Provide epoxy painted pipe straps 
for copper tube or plastic inserted vibration isolation clamps. 

4) Insulated Lines: Provide pre-insulated calcium silicate shields 
sized for copper tube. 

 

2.8 PIPE PENETRATIONS 

A. Install sleeves during construction for other than blocked out floor 
openings for risers in mechanical bays. 

B. To prevent accidental liquid spills from passing to a lower level, 
provide the following: 

1. For sleeves: Extend sleeve 25 mm (one inch) above finished floor and 
provide sealant for watertight joint. 

2. For blocked out floor openings: Provide 40 mm (1-1/2 inch) angle set 
in silicone adhesive around opening. 

3. For drilled penetrations: Provide 40 mm (1-1/2 inch) angle ring or 
square set in silicone adhesive around penetration. 

C. Penetrations are not allowed through beams or ribs, but may be installed 
in concrete beam flanges. Any deviation from these requirements must 
receive prior approval of Resident Engineer. 

D. Sheet Metal, Plastic, or Moisture-resistant Fiber Sleeves: Provide for 
pipe passing through floors, interior walls, and partitions, unless 
brass or steel pipe sleeves are specifically called for below. 

E. Brass Pipe Sleeves: Provide for pipe passing through quarry tile, 
terrazzo or ceramic tile floors. Connect sleeve with floor plate. 

F. Sleeves are not required for wall hydrants for fire department 
connections or in drywall construction. 

G. Sleeve Clearance: Sleeve through floors, walls, partitions, and beam 
flanges shall be one inch greater in diameter than external diameter of 


pipe. Sleeve for pipe with insulation shall be large enough to 
accommodate the insulation. Interior openings shall be caulked tight 
with fire stopping material and sealant to prevent the spread of fire, 
smoke, and gases. 

H. Sealant and Adhesives: Shall be as specified in Section 07 92 00, JOINT 
SEALANTS. 

2.9 DUCT PENETRATIONS 

A. Provide firestopping for openings through fire and smoke barriers, 
maintaining minimum required rating of floor, ceiling or wall assembly. 
See section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

2.10 SPECIAL TOOLS AND LUBRICANTS 

A. Furnish, and turn over to the Resident Engineer, tools not readily 
available commercially, that are required for disassembly or adjustment 
of equipment and machinery furnished. 

B. Grease Guns with Attachments for Applicable Fittings: One for each type 
of grease required for each motor or other equipment. 

C. Tool Containers: Hardwood or metal, permanently identified for in tended 
service and mounted, or located, where directed by the Resident 
Engineer. 

D. Lubricants: A minimum of 0.95 L (one quart) of oil, and 0.45 kg (one 
pound) of grease, of equipment manufacturer's recommended grade and 
type, in unopened containers and properly identified as to use for each 
different application. 

2.11 WALL, FLOOR AND CEILING PLATES 

A. Material and Type: Chrome plated brass or chrome plated steel, one piece 
or split type with concealed hinge, with set screw for fastening to 
pipe, or sleeve. Use plates that fit tight around pipes, cover openings 
around pipes and cover the entire pipe sleeve projection. 

B. Thickness: Not less than 2.4 mm (3/32-inch) for floor plates. For wall 
and ceiling plates, not less than 0.64 mm (0.025-inch) for up to 80 mm 
(3-inch pipe), 0.89 mm (0.035-inch) for larger pipe. 

C. Locations: Use where pipe penetrates floors, walls and ceilings in 
exposed locations, in finished areas only. Provide a watertight joint in 
spaces where brass or steel pipe sleeves are specified. 

2.12 ASBESTOS 

 Materials containing asbestos are not permitted. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 ARRANGEMENT AND INSTALLATION OF EQUIPMENT AND PIPING 

A. Coordinate location of piping, sleeves, inserts, hangers, ductwork and 
equipment. Locate piping, sleeves, inserts, hangers, ductwork and 


equipment clear of windows, doors, openings, light outlets, and other 
services and utilities. Prepare equipment layout drawings to coordinate 
proper location and personnel access of all facilities. Submit the 
drawings for review as required by Part 1. Follow manufacturer's 
published recommendations for installation methods not otherwise 
specified. 

B. Operating Personnel Access and Observation Provisions: Select and 
arrange all equipment and systems to provide clear view and easy access, 
without use of portable ladders, for maintenance and operation of all 
devices including, but not limited to: all equipment items, valves, 
filters, strainers, transmitters, sensors, control devices. All gages 
and indicators shall be clearly visible by personnel standing on the 
floor or on permanent platforms. Do not reduce or change maintenance and 
operating space and access provisions that are shown on the drawings. 

C. Equipment and Piping Support: Coordinate structural systems necessary 
for pipe and equipment support with pipe and equipment locations to 
permit proper installation. 

D. Location of pipe sleeves, trenches and chases shall be accurately 
coordinated with equipment and piping locations. 

E. Cutting Holes: 

1. Cut holes through concrete and masonry by rotary core drill. 
Pneumatic hammer, impact electric, and hand or manual hammer type 
drill will not be allowed, except as permitted by Resident Engineer 
where working area space is limited. 

2. Locate holes to avoid interference with structural members such as 
beams or grade beams. Holes shall be laid out in advance and drilling 
done only after approval by Resident Engineer. If the Contractor 
considers it necessary to drill through structural members, this 
matter shall be referred to Resident Engineer for approval. 

3. Do not penetrate membrane waterproofing. 

F. Interconnection of Instrumentation or Control Devices: Generally, 
electrical interconnections are not shown but must be provided. 

G. Minor Piping: Generally, small diameter pipe runs from drips and drains, 
water cooling, and other service are not shown but must be provided. 

H. Protection and Cleaning: 

1. Equipment and materials shall be carefully handled, properly stored, 
and adequately protected to prevent damage before and during 
installation, in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations 
and as approved by the Resident Engineer. Damaged or defective items 
in the opinion of the Resident Engineer, shall be replaced. 


2. Protect all finished parts of equipment, such as , from rust prior to 
operation by means of protective grease coating and wrapping. Close 
pipe openings with caps or plugs during installation. Tightly cover 
and protect fixtures and equipment against dirt, water chemical, or 
mechanical injury. At completion of all work thoroughly clean 
fixtures, exposed materials and equipment. 

I. Concrete and Grout: Use concrete and shrink compensating grout 25 MPa 
(3000 psi) minimum, specified in Section 03 30 00, CAST-IN-PLACE 
CONCRETE. 

J. Install gages, thermometers, valves and other devices with due regard 
for ease in reading or operating and maintaining said devices. Locate 
and position thermometers and gages to be easily read by operator or 
staff standing on floor or walkway provided. Servicing shall not require 
dismantling adjacent equipment or pipe work. 

K. Work in Existing Building: 

1. Perform as specified in Article, OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS, 
Article, ALTERATIONS, and Article, RESTORATION of the Section 01 00 
00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS for relocation of existing equipment, 
alterations and restoration of existing building(s). 

2. As specified in Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, Article, 
OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS, make alterations to existing service 
piping at times that will least interfere with normal operation of 
the facility. 

3. Cut required openings through existing masonry and reinforced 
concrete using diamond core drills. Use of pneumatic hammer type 
drills, impact type electric drills, and hand or manual hammer type 
drills, will be permitted only with approval of the Resident 
Engineer. Locate openings that will least effect structural slabs, 
columns, ribs or beams. Refer to the Resident Engineer for 
determination of proper design for openings through structural 
sections and opening layouts approval, prior to cutting or drilling 
into structure. After Resident Engineer's approval, carefully cut 
opening through construction no larger than absolutely necessary for 
the required installation. 

L. Inaccessible Equipment: 

1. Where the Government determines that the Contractor has installed 
equipment not conveniently accessible for operation and maintenance, 
equipment shall be removed and reinstalled or remedial action 
performed as directed at no additional cost to the Government. 

2. The term "conveniently accessible" is defined as capable of being 
reached without the use of ladders, or without climbing or crawling 


under or over obstacles such as motors, fans, pumps, belt guards, 
transformers, high voltage lines, piping, and ductwork. 

3.2 TEMPORARY PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 

A. Continuity of operation of existing facilities will generally require 
temporary installation or relocation of equipment and piping. 

B. The Contractor shall provide all required facilities in accordance with 
the requirements of phased construction and maintenance of service. All 
piping and equipment shall be properly supported, sloped to drain, 
operate without excessive stress, and shall be insulated where injury 
can occur to personnel by contact with operating facilities. The 
requirements of Paragraph 3.1 apply. 

C. Temporary facilities and piping shall be completely removed and any 
openings in structures sealed. Provide necessary blind flanges and caps 
to seal open piping remaining in service. 

3.3 RIGGING 

A. Design is based on application of available equipment. Openings in 
building structures are planned to accommodate design scheme. 

B. Alternative methods of equipment delivery may be offered by Contractor 
and will be considered by Government under specified restrictions of 
phasing and maintenance of service as well as structural integrity of 
the building. 

C. Close all openings in the building when not required for rigging 
operations to maintain proper environment in the facility for Government 
operation and maintenance of service. 

D. Contractor shall check all clearances, weight limitations and shall 
offer a rigging plan designed by a Registered Professional Engineer. All 
modifications to structures, including reinforcement thereof, shall be 
at Contractor's cost, time and responsibility. 

E. Rigging plan and methods shall be referred to Resident Engineer for 
evaluation prior to actual work. 

F. Restore building to original condition upon completion of rigging work. 

3.4 PIPE AND EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS 

A. Where hanger spacing does not correspond with joist or rib spacing, use 
structural steel channels secured directly to joist and rib structure 
that will correspond to the required hanger spacing, and then suspend 
the equipment and piping from the channels. Drill or burn holes in 
structural steel only with the prior approval of the Resident Engineer. 

B. Use of chain, wire or strap hangers; wood for blocking, stays and 
bracing; or, hangers suspended from piping above will not be permitted. 
Replace or thoroughly clean rusty products and paint with zinc primer. 


C. Use hanger rods that are straight and vertical. Turnbuckles for vertical 
adjustments may be omitted where limited space prevents use. Provide a 
minimum of 15 mm (1/2-inch) clearance between pipe or piping covering 
and adjacent work. 

D. HVAC Horizontal Pipe Support Spacing: Refer to MSS SP-69. Provide 
additional supports at valves, strainers, in-line pumps and other heavy 
components. Provide a support within one foot of each elbow. 

E. HVAC Vertical Pipe Supports: 

1. Up to 150 mm (6-inch pipe), 9 m (30 feet) long, bolt riser clamps to 
the pipe below couplings, or welded to the pipe and rests supports 
securely on the building structure. 

2. Vertical pipe larger than the foregoing, support on base elbows or 
tees, or substantial pipe legs extending to the building structure. 

F. Overhead Supports: 

1. The basic structural system of the building is designed to sustain 
the loads imposed by equipment and piping to be supported overhead. 

2. Provide steel structural members, in addition to those shown, of 
adequate capability to support the imposed loads, located in 
accordance with the final approved layout of equipment and piping. 

3. Tubing and capillary systems shall be supported in channel troughs. 

3.5 MECHANICAL DEMOLITION 

A. Rigging access, other than indicated on the drawings, shall be provided 
by the Contractor after approval for structural integrity by the 
Resident Engineer. Such access shall be provided without additional cost 
or time to the Government. Where work is in an operating facility, 
provide approved protection from dust and debris at all times B. In an 
operating facility, maintain the operation, cleanliness and safety. 
Government personnel will be carrying on their normal duties of 
operating, cleaning and maintaining equipment and facility operation. 
Confine the work to the immediate area concerned; maintain cleanliness 
and wet down demolished materials to eliminate dust. Do not permit 
debris to accumulate in the area to the detriment of facility operation. 
Perform all flame cutting to maintain the fire safety integrity of this 
plant. Adequate fire extinguishing facilities shall be available at all 
times. Perform all work in accordance with recognized fire protection 
standards. Inspection will be made by personnel of the VA Medical 
Center, and Contractor shall follow all directives of the RE or COTR 
with regard to rigging, safety, fire safety, and maintenance of 
operations. 

B. Completely remove all piping, wiring, conduit, and other devices 
associated with the equipment not to be re-used in the new work. This 


includes all pipe, valves, fittings, insulation, and all hangers 
including the top connection and any fastenings to building structural 
systems. Seal all openings, after removal of equipment, pipes, ducts, 
and other penetrations in walls and floors, in an approved manner and in 
accordance with plans and specifications where specifically covered. 
Structural integrity of the building system shall be maintained. 
Reference shall also be made to the drawings and specifications of the 
other disciplines in the project for additional facilities to be 
demolished or handled. 

C. All valves including gate, globe, ball, butterfly and check, all 
pressure gages and thermometers with wells shall remain Government 
property and shall be removed and delivered to Resident Engineer and 
stored as directed. The Contractor shall remove all other material and 
equipment, devices and demolition debris under these plans and 
specifications. Such material shall be removed from Government property 
expeditiously and shall not be allowed to accumulate. 

3.6 CLEANING AND PAINTING 

A. Prior to final inspection and acceptance of the plant and facilities for 
beneficial use by the Government, the plant facilities, equipment and 
systems shall be thoroughly cleaned and painted. Refer to Section 09 91 
00, PAINTING. 

B. In addition, the following special conditions apply: 

1. Cleaning shall be thorough. Use solvents, cleaning materials and 
methods recommended by the manufacturers for the specific tasks. 
Remove all rust prior to painting and from surfaces to remain 
unpainted. Repair scratches, scuffs, and abrasions prior to applying 
prime and finish coats. 
2. Material And Equipment Not To Be Painted Includes: 


a. Motors, controllers, control switches, and safety switches. 

b. Control and interlock devices. 

c. Regulators. 

d. Pressure reducing valves. 

e. Control valves and thermostatic elements. 

f. Lubrication devices and grease fittings. 

g. Copper, brass, aluminum, stainless steel and bronze surfaces. 

h. Valve stems and rotating shafts. 

i. Pressure gauges and thermometers. 

j. Glass. 

k. Name plates. 


3. Control and instrument panels shall be cleaned, damaged surfaces 
repaired, and shall be touched-up with matching paint obtained from 
panel manufacturer. 

4. Pumps, motors, steel and cast iron bases, and coupling guards shall 
be cleaned, and shall be touched-up with the same color as utilized 
by the pump manufacturer 

5. Temporary Facilities: Apply paint to surfaces that do not have 
existing finish coats. 

6. Paint shall withstand the following temperatures without peeling or 
discoloration: 

a. Condensate and feedwater -- 38 degrees C (100 degrees F) on 
insulation jacket surface and 120 degrees C (250 degrees F) on 
metal pipe surface. 

b. Steam -- 52 degrees C (125 degrees F) on insulation jacket surface 
and 190 degrees C (375 degrees F) on metal pipe surface. 

7. Final result shall be smooth, even-colored, even-textured factory 
finish on all items. Completely repaint the entire piece of 
equipment if necessary to achieve this. 

3.7 IDENTIFICATION SIGNS 

A. Provide laminated plastic signs, with engraved lettering not less than 
5 mm (3/16-inch) high, designating functions, for all equipment and 
control devices, including automatic control valves. Nomenclature and 
identification symbols shall correspond to that used in maintenance 
manual, and in diagrams specified elsewhere. Attach by chain, adhesive, 
or screws. 

B. Factory Built Equipment: Metal plate, securely attached, with name and 
address of manufacturer, serial number, model number, size, performance. 

C. Pipe Identification: Refer to Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

3.8 LUBRICATION 

A. Lubricate all devices requiring lubrication prior to initial operation. 
Field-check all devices for proper lubrication. 

B. Equip all devices with required lubrication fittings or devices. Provide 
a minimum of one liter (one quart) of oil and 0.5 kg (one pound) of 
grease of manufacturer's recommended grade and type for each different 
application; also provide 12 grease sticks for lubricated plug valves. 
Deliver all materials to Resident Engineer in unopened containers that 
are properly identified as to application. 

C. Provide a separate grease gun with attachments for applicable fittings 
for each type of grease applied. 

D. All lubrication points shall be accessible without disassembling 
equipment, except to remove access plates. 


3.9 COMMISSIONING 

A. Provide commissioning documentation in accordance with the requirements 
of Section 23 08 00 – COMMISSIONING OF HVAC SYSTEMS for all inspection, 
start up, and contractor testing required above and required by the 
System Readiness Checklist provided by the Commissioning Agent. 

B. Components provided under this section of the specifications will be 
tested as part of a larger system. Refer to Section 23 08 00 – 
COMMISSIONING OF HVAC SYSTEMS and related sections for contractor 
responsibilities for system commissioning. 

3.10 STARTUP AND TEMPORARY OPERATION 

 Start up equipment as described in equipment specifications. Verify that 
vibration is within specified tolerance prior to extended operation. 
Temporary use of equipment is specified in Section 01 00 00, GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS, Article, TEMPORARY USE OF MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL 
EQUIPMENT. 

3.11 OPERATING AND PERFORMANCE TESTS 

A. Prior to the final inspection, perform required tests as specified in 
Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS and submit the test reports and 
records to the Resident Engineer. 

B. Should evidence of malfunction in any tested system, or piece of 
equipment or component part thereof, occur during or as a result of 
tests, make proper corrections, repairs or replacements, and repeat 
tests at no additional cost to the Government. 

C. When completion of certain work or system occurs at a time when final 
control settings and adjustments cannot be properly made to make 
performance tests, then make performance tests for heating systems and 
for cooling systems respectively during first actual seasonal use of 
respective systems following completion of work. 

3.12 INSTRUCTIONS TO VA PERSONNEL 

 Provide in accordance with Article, INSTRUCTIONS, of Section 01 00 00, 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 23 05 41 
NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 Noise criteria, seismic restraints for equipment, vibration tolerance 
and vibration isolation for HVAC and plumbing work. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STRUCTURAL 
COMPONENTS: Seismic requirements for non-structural equipment 

B. Section 23 31 00, HVAC DUCTS and CASINGS: requirements for flexible 
duct connectors, sound attenuators and sound absorbing duct lining. 

C. SECTION 23 05 93, TESTING, ADJUSTING, and BALANCING FOR HVAC: 
requirements for sound and vibration tests. 

D. SECTION 23 37 00, AIR OUTLETS and INLETS: noise requirements for Ggrilles. 


1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Refer to article, QUALITY ASSURANCE in specification Section 23 05 11, 
COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

B. Noise Criteria: 

1. Noise levels in all 8 octave bands due to equipment and duct systems 
shall not exceed following NC levels: 

TYPE OF ROOM 

NC LEVEL 

Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms 

40 

Conference Rooms 

35 

Corridors (Nurse Stations) 

40 

Corridors(Public) 

40 

Examination Rooms 

35 

Kitchens 

50 

Lobbies, Waiting Areas 

40 

Locker Rooms 

45 

Offices, Large Open 

40 

Offices, Small Private 

35 

Operating Rooms 

40 

Patient Rooms 

35 

Shops 

50 

Treatment Rooms 

35 




 



 

2. For equipment which has no sound power ratings scheduled on the 
plans, the contractor shall select equipment such that the foregoing 
noise criteria, local ordinance noise levels, and OSHA requirements 
are not exceeded. Selection procedure shall be in 
accordance with ASHRAE Fundamentals Handbook, Chapter 7, Sound and 
Vibration. 

3. An allowance, not to exceed 5db, may be added to the measured value 
to compensate for the variation of the room attenuating effect 
between room test condition prior to occupancy and design condition 
after occupancy which may include the addition of sound absorbing 
material, such as, furniture. This allowance may not be taken after 
occupancy. The room attenuating effect is defined as the difference 
between sound power level emitted to room and sound pressure level 
in room. 

4. In absence of specified measurement requirements, measure equipment 
noise levels three feet from equipment and at an elevation of maximum 
noise generation. 

C. Seismic Restraint Requirements: 

 1. Equipment: 

a. All mechanical equipment not supported with isolators external to 
the unit shall be securely anchored to the structure. Such 
mechanical equipment shall be properly supported to resist a 
horizontal force of 50 percent of the weight of the equipment 
furnished. 

2. Piping: Refer to specification Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS 
FOR HVAC. 

3. Ductwork: Refer to specification Section 23 31 00, HVAC DUCTS AND 
CASINGS. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with specification Section 01 33 23, SHOP 
DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, and SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Vibration isolators: 

b. Hangers 

c. Snubbers 

d. Thrust restraints 


2. Bases. 

3. Acoustical enclosures. 

C. Isolator manufacturer shall furnish with submittal load calculations 
for selection of isolators, including supplemental bases, based on 
lowest operating speed of equipment supported. 

 D. Seismic Requirements: Submittals are required for all equipment anchors, 
supports and seismic restraints. Submittals shall include 
weights, dimensions, standard connections, and manufacturer's 
certification that all specified equipment will withstand seismic 
Lateral Force requirements as shown on drawings. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning 
Engineers, Inc. (ASHRAE): 

2009 ...................Fundamentals Handbook, Chapter 7, Sound and 
Vibration 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A123/A123M-09...........Standard Specification for Zinc (Hot-Dip 
Galvanized) Coatings on Iron and Steel Products 

A307-07b................Standard Specification for Carbon Steel Bolts 
and Studs, 60,000 PSI Tensile Strength 

D2240-05(2010)..........Standard Test Method for Rubber Property - 
Durometer Hardness 

D. Manufacturers Standardization (MSS): 

SP-58-2009..............Pipe Hangers and Supports-Materials, Design and 
Manufacture 

E. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA): 

29 CFR 1910.95..........Occupational Noise Exposure 

F. American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE): 

ASCE 7-10 ..............Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other 
Structures. 

G. American National Standards Institute / Sheet Metal and Air 
Conditioning Contractor’s National Association (ANSI/SMACNA): 

001-2008................Seismic Restraint Manual: Guidelines for 
Mechanical Systems, 3rd Edition. 

H. International Code Council (ICC): 


2009 IBC................International Building Code. 

I. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA): 

H-18-8 2010.............Seismic Design Requirements. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

A. Type of isolator, base, and minimum static deflection shall be as 
required for each specific equipment application as recommended by 
isolator or equipment manufacturer but subject to minimum requirements 
indicated herein and in the schedule on the drawings. 

B. Elastometric Isolators shall comply with ASTM D2240 and be oil 
resistant neoprene with a maximum stiffness of 60 durometer and have a 
straight-line deflection curve. 

C. Uniform Loading: Select and locate isolators to produce uniform loading 
and deflection even when equipment weight is not evenly distributed. 

D. Color code isolators by type and size for easy identification of 
capacity. 

2.2 SEISMIC RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS FOR EQUIPMENTS 

A. On all sides of suspended equipment, provide bracing for rigid supports 
and provide restraints for resiliently supported equipment. 

2.3 VIBRATION ISOLATORS 

A. Hangers: Shall be combination neoprene and springs unless otherwise 
noted and shall allow for expansion of pipe. 

1. Combination Neoprene and Spring (Type H): Vibration hanger shall 
contain a spring and double deflection neoprene element in series. 
Spring shall have a diameter not less than 0.8 of compressed operating 
spring height. Spring shall have a minimum additional travel 
of 50 percent between design height and solid height. Spring shall 
permit a 15 degree angular misalignment without rubbing on hanger 
box. 

2. Spring Position Hanger (Type HP): Similar to combination neoprene 
and spring hanger except hanger shall hold piping at a fixed 
elevation during installation and include a secondary adjustment 
feature to transfer load to spring while maintaining same position. 

3. Neoprene (Type HN): Vibration hanger shall contain a double 
deflection type neoprene isolation element. Hanger rod shall be 
separated from contact with hanger bracket by a neoprene grommet. 

4. Spring (Type HS): Vibration hanger shall contain a coiled steel 
spring in series with a neoprene grommet. Spring shall have a 


diameter not less than 0.8 of compressed operating spring height. 
Spring shall have a minimum additional travel of 50 percent between 
design height and solid height. Spring shall permit a 15 degree 
angular misalignment without rubbing on hanger box. 

5. Hanger supports for piping 50 mm (2 inches) and larger shall have a 
pointer and scale deflection indicator. 

6. Hangers used in seismic applications shall be provided with a 
neoprene and steel rebound washer installed ¼’ clear of bottom of 
hanger housing in operation to prevent spring from excessive upward 
travel 

B. Snubbers: Each spring mounted base shall have a minimum of four alldirectional 
or eight two directional (two per side) seismic snubbers 
that are double acting. Elastomeric materials shall be shock absorbent 
neoprene bridge quality bearing pads, maximum 60 durometer, replaceable 
and have a minimum thickness of 6 mm (1/4 inch). Air gap between hard 
and resilient material shall be not less than 3 mm (1/8 inch) nor more 
than 6 mm (1/4 inch). Restraints shall be capable of withstanding 
design load without permanent deformation. 

C. Thrust Restraints (Type THR): Restraints shall provide a spring element 
contained in a steel frame with neoprene pads at each end attachment. 
Restraints shall have factory preset thrust and be field adjustable to 
allow a maximum movement of 6 mm (1/4 inch) when the fan starts and 
stops. Restraint assemblies shall include rods, angle brackets and 
other hardware for field installation. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Vibration Isolation: 

1. No metal-to-metal contact will be permitted between fixed and 
floating parts. 

2. Provide heat shields where elastomers are subject to temperatures 
over 38 degrees C (l00 degrees F). 

3. Non-rotating equipment such as vav terminal units with re-heat coils 
shall be mounted on isolation units having the same static 
deflection as the isolation hangers or support of the pipe connected 
to the equipment. 

B. Inspection and Adjustments: Check for vibration and noise transmission 
through connections, piping, ductwork, and walls. Adjust, repair, or 


replace isolators as required to reduce vibration and noise 
transmissions to specified levels. 

3.2 ADJUSTING 

A. Adjust vibration isolators after piping systems are filled and 
equipment is at operating weight. 

B. Adjust limit stops on restrained spring isolators to mount equipment at 
normal operating height. After equipment installation is complete, 
adjust limit stops so they are out of contact during normal operation. 

C. Attach thrust limits at centerline of thrust and adjust to a maximum of 
1/4inch (6-mm) movement during start and stop. 

D. Adjust active height of spring isolators. 

E. Adjust snubbers according to manufacturer's recommendations. 

F. Adjust seismic restraints to permit free movement of equipment within 
normal mode of operation. 

G. Torque anchor bolts according to equipment manufacturer's 
recommendations to resist seismic forces. 

3.3 COMMISSIONING 

A. Provide commissioning documentation in accordance with the requirements 
of section 23 08 00 – COMMISSIONING OF HVAC SYSTEMS for all inspection, 
start up, and contractor testing required above and required by the 
System Readiness Checklist provided by the Commissioning Agent. 

B. Components provided under this section of the specification will be 
tested as part of a larger system. Refer to section 23 08 00 – 
COMMISSIONING OF HVAC SYSTEMS and related sections for contractor 
responsibilities for system commissioning. 

- - - E N D - - - 

 


SECTION 23 05 93 
TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Testing, adjusting, and balancing (TAB) of heating, ventilating and air 
conditioning (HVAC) systems. TAB includes the following: 

1. Planning systematic TAB procedures. 

2. Design Review Report. 

3. Systems Inspection report. 

4. Duct Air Leakage test report. 

5. Systems Readiness Report. 

6. Balancing air and water distribution systems; adjustment of total 
system to provide design performance; and testing performance of 
equipment and automatic controls. 

7. Vibration and sound measurements. 

8. Recording and reporting results. 

B. Definitions: 

1. Basic TAB used in this Section: Chapter 37, "Testing, Adjusting and 
Balancing" of 2007 ASHRAE Handbook, "HVAC Applications". 

2. TAB: Testing, Adjusting and Balancing; the process of checking and 
adjusting HVAC systems to meet design objectives. 

3. AABC: Associated Air Balance Council. 

4. NEBB: National Environmental Balancing Bureau. 

5. Hydronic Systems: Includes heating hot water 

6. Air Systems: Includes all supply air, return air and exhaust air 
systems. 

7. Flow rate tolerance: The allowable percentage variation, minus to 
plus, of actual flow rate from values (design) in the contract 
documents. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC: General Mechanical 
Requirements. 

B. Section 23 05 41, NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL FOR HVAC PIPING AND 
EQUIPMENT: Noise and Vibration Requirements. 

C. Section 23 07 11, HVAC,: Piping and Equipment Insulation. 

D. Section 23 36 00, AIR TERMINAL UNITS: Terminal Units Performance. 

E. Section 23 31 00, HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS: Duct Leakage. 


F. Section 23 82 16, AIR COILS 

G. Section 23 37 00, AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 

H. Section 23 08 00, COMMISSIONING OF HVAC SYSTEMS. Requirements for 
commissioning, systems readiness checklists, and training 

 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Refer to Articles, Quality Assurance and Submittals, in Section 
23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC, Section 23 08 00, COMMISSIONING 
OF HVAC SYSTEMS. 

B. Qualifications: 

1. TAB Agency: The TAB agency shall be a subcontractor of the General 
Contractor and shall report to and be paid by the General 
Contractor. 

2. The TAB agency shall be either a certified member of AABC or 
certified by the NEBB to perform TAB service for HVAC, water 
balancing and vibrations and sound testing of equipment. The 
certification shall be maintained for the entire duration of duties 
specified herein. If, for any reason, the agency loses subject 
certification during this period, the General Contractor shall 
immediately notify the Resident Engineer and submit another TAB firm 
for approval. Any agency that has been the subject of disciplinary 
action by either the AABC or the NEBB within the five years 
preceding Contract Award shall not be eligible to perform any work 
related to the TAB. All work performed in this Section and in other 
related Sections by the TAB agency shall be considered invalid if 
the TAB agency loses its certification prior to Contract completion, 
and the successor agency’s review shows unsatisfactory work 
performed by the predecessor agency. 

3. TAB Specialist: The TAB specialist shall be either a member of AABC 
or an experienced technician of the Agency certified by NEBB. The 
certification shall be maintained for the entire duration of duties 
specified herein. If, for any reason, the Specialist loses subject 
certification during this period, the General Contractor shall 
immediately notify the Resident Engineer and submit another TAB 
Specialist for approval. Any individual that has been the subject of 
disciplinary action by either the AABC or the NEBB within the five 
years preceding Contract Award shall not be eligible to perform any 


duties related to the HVAC systems, including TAB. All work 
specified in this Section and in other related Sections performed by 
the TAB specialist shall be considered invalid if the TAB Specialist 
loses its certification prior to Contract completion and must be 
performed by an approved successor. 

4. TAB Specialist shall be identified by the General Contractor within 
60 days after the notice to proceed. The TAB specialist will be 
coordinating, scheduling and reporting all TAB work and related 
activities and will provide necessary information as required by the 
Resident Engineer. The responsibilities would specifically include: 

a. Shall directly supervise all TAB work. 

b. Shall sign the TAB reports that bear the seal of the TAB 
standard. The reports shall be accompanied by report forms and 
schematic drawings required by the TAB standard, AABC or NEBB. 

c. Would follow all TAB work through its satisfactory completion. 

d. Shall provide final markings of settings of all HVAC adjustment 
devices. 

e. Permanently mark location of duct test ports. 

5. All TAB technicians performing actual TAB work shall be experienced 
and must have done satisfactory work on a minimum of 3 projects 
comparable in size and complexity to this project. Qualifications 
must be certified by the TAB agency in writing. The lead technician 
shall be certified by AABC or NEBB 

C. Test Equipment Criteria: The instrumentation shall meet the 
accuracy/calibration requirements established by AABC National 
Standards or by NEBB Procedural Standards for Testing, Adjusting and 
Balancing of Environmental Systems and instrument manufacturer. Provide 
calibration history of the instruments to be used for test and balance 
purpose. 

D. Tab Criteria: 

1. One or more of the applicable AABC, NEBB or SMACNA publications, 
supplemented by ASHRAE Handbook "HVAC Applications" Chapter 36, and 
requirements stated herein shall be the basis for planning, 
procedures, and reports. 

2. Flow rate tolerance: Following tolerances are allowed. For 
tolerances not mentioned herein follow ASHRAE Handbook "HVAC 
Applications", Chapter 36, as a guideline. 


a. Air terminal units (maximum values): Minus 2 percent to plus l0 
percent. 

b. Individual room air outlets and inlets, and air flow rates not 
mentioned above: Minus 5 percent to plus l0 percent except if the 
air to a space is 100 CFM or less the tolerance would be minus 5 
to plus 5 percent. 

c. /Hot water coils: Minus 5 percent to plus 5 percent. 

3. Systems shall be adjusted for energy efficient operation as 
described in PART 3. 

4. Typical TAB procedures and results shall be demonstrated to the 
Resident Engineer scope of work: 

a. When field TAB work begins. 

b. During each partial final inspection and the final inspection for 
the project if requested by VA. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, and SAMPLES. 

B. Submit names and qualifications of TAB agency and TAB specialists 
within 60 days after the notice to proceed. Submit information on three 
recently completed projects and a list of proposed test equipment. 

C. For use by the Resident Engineer staff, submit one complete set of 
applicable AABC or NEBB publications that will be the basis of TAB 
work. 

D. Submit Following for Review and Approval: 

1. Design Review Report within 90 days for conventional design projects 
after the system layout on air and water side is completed by the 
Contractor. 

2. Systems inspection report on equipment and installation for 
conformance with design. 

3. Duct Air Leakage Test Report. 

4. Systems Readiness Report. 

5. Intermediate and Final TAB reports covering flow balance and 
adjustments, performance tests, vibration tests and sound tests. 

6. Include in final reports uncorrected installation deficiencies noted 
during TAB and applicable explanatory comments on test results that 
differ from design requirements. 


E. Prior to request for Final or Partial Final inspection, submit 
completed Test and Balance report for the area. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The following publications form a part of this specification to the 
extent indicated by the reference thereto. In text the publications are 
referenced to by the acronym of the organization. 

B. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning 
Engineers, Inc. (ASHRAE): 

2007 ...................HVAC Applications ASHRAE Handbook, Chapter 37, 
Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing and Chapter 
47, Sound and Vibration Control 

C. Associated Air Balance Council (AABC): 

2002....................AABC National Standards for Total System 
Balance 

D. National Environmental Balancing Bureau (NEBB): 

7th Edition 2005 ........Procedural Standards for Testing, Adjusting, 
Balancing of Environmental Systems 

2nd Edition 2006 .......Procedural Standards for the Measurement of 
Sound and Vibration 

E. Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association 
(SMACNA): 

3rd Edition 2002 ........HVAC SYSTEMS Testing, Adjusting and Balancing 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 PLUGS 

 Provide plastic plugs to seal holes drilled in ductwork for test 
purposes. 

2.2 INSULATION REPAIR MATERIAL 

 See Section 23 07 11, HVAC INSULATION Provide for repair of insulation 
removed or damaged for TAB work. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 GENERAL 

A. Refer to TAB Criteria in Article, Quality Assurance. 

B. Obtain applicable contract documents and copies of approved submittals 
for HVAC equipment and automatic control systems. 

3.2 DESIGN REVIEW REPORT 

 The TAB Specialist shall review the Contract Plans and specifications 
and advise the Resident Engineer of any design deficiencies that would 


prevent the HVAC systems from effectively operating in accordance with 
the sequence of operation specified or prevent the effective and 
accurate TAB of the system. The TAB Specialist shall provide a report 
individually listing each deficiency and the corresponding proposed 
corrective action necessary for proper system operation. 

3.3 SYSTEMS INSPECTION REPORT 

A. Inspect equipment and installation for conformance with design. 

B. The inspection and report is to be done after air distribution 
equipment is on site and duct installation has begun, but well in 
advance of performance testing and balancing work. The purpose of the 
inspection is to identify and report deviations from design and ensure 
that systems will be ready for TAB at the appropriate time. 

C. Reports: Follow check list format developed by AABC, NEBB or SMACNA, 
supplemented by narrative comments, fans. Check for conformance with 
submittals. Verify that diffuser and register sizes are correct. Check 
air terminal unit installation including their duct sizes and routing. 

3.4 DUCT AIR LEAKAGE TEST REPORT 

 TAB Agency shall perform the leakage test as outlined in "Duct leakage 
Tests and Repairs" in Section 23 31 00, HVAC DUCTS and CASINGS for TAB 
agency’s role and responsibilities in witnessing, recording and 
reporting of deficiencies. 

3.5 SYSTEM READINESS REPORT 

 A. The TAB Contractor shall measure existing air and water flow rates 
associated with existing systems utilized to serve renovated areas as 
indicated on drawings. Submit report of findings to resident engineer. 

B. Inspect each System to ensure that it is complete including 
installation and operation of controls. Submit report to RE in 
standard format and forms prepared and or approved by the Commissioning 
Agent. 

C. Verify that all items such as ductwork piping, ports, terminals, 
connectors, etc., that is required for TAB are installed. Provide a 
report to the Resident Engineer. 

3.6 TAB REPORTS 

A. Submit an intermediate report for the systems and equipment tested and 
balanced to establish satisfactory test results. 


B. The TAB contractor shall provide raw data immediately in writing to the 
Resident Engineer if there is a problem in achieving intended results 
before submitting a formal report. 

C. If over 20 percent of readings in the intermediate report fall outside 
the acceptable range, the TAB report shall be considered invalid and 
all contract TAB work shall be repeated and re-submitted for approval 
at no additional cost to the owner. 

D. Do not proceed with the remaining systems until intermediate report is 
approved by the Resident Engineer. 

3.7 TAB PROCEDURES 

A. Tab shall be performed in accordance with the requirement of the 
Standard under which TAB agency is certified by either AABC or NEBB. 

B. General: During TAB all related system components shall be in full 
operation. Set controls and/or block off parts of distribution systems 
to simulate design operation of variable volume air or water systems 
for test and balance work. 

C. Coordinate TAB procedures with existing systems and any phased 
construction completion requirements for the project. Provide TAB 
reports for pre construction air and water flow rate and for/ each 
phase of the project prior to partial final inspections of each phase 
of the project. Return existing areas outside the work area to pre 
constructed conditions. 
D. Allow 60 days time in construction schedule for TAB and submission of 
all reports for an organized and timely correction of deficiencies. 


E. Air Balance and Equipment Test: Include terminal units, and 
diffusers/outlets/inlets, 

1. Test and balance systems in all specified modes of operation, 
including variable volume, economizer, and fire emergency modes. 
Verify that dampers and other controls function properly. 

2. Variable air volume (VAV) systems: 

a. Coordinate TAB, including system volumetric controls, with 
Section 23 09 23, DIRECT-DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC. 

b. Section 23 36 00, AIR TERMINAL UNITS, specifies that maximum and 
minimum flow rates for air terminal units (ATU) be factory set. 
Check and readjust ATU flow rates if necessary. Balance air 
distribution from ATU on full cooling maximum scheduled cubic 
meters per minute (cubic feet per minute). Reset room thermostats 


and check ATU operation from maximum to minimum cooling, to the 
heating mode, and back to cooling. Record and report the heating 
coil leaving air temperature when the ATU is in the maximum 
heating mode. Record and report outdoor air flow rates under all 
operating conditions (The test shall demonstrate that the minimum 
outdoor air ventilation rate shall remain constant under al 
operating conditions). 

c. Adjust operating pressure control setpoint to maintain the design 
flow to each space with the lowest setpoint. 

3. Record final measurements for air handling equipment performance 
data sheets. 

F. Water Balance and Equipment Test: Include heating hot water coils. 

1. Adjust flow rates for equipment. Set coils and evaporator to values 
on equipment submittals, if different from values on contract 
drawings. 

2. Record final measurements for hydronic equipment on performance data 
sheets. Include entering and leaving air temperatures forreheat 
coils. Make air and water temperature measurements at the same time. 

3.8 VIBRATION TESTING 

A. Furnish instruments and perform vibration measurements as specified in 
Section 23 05 41, NOISE and VIBRATION CONTROL FOR HVAC PIPING and 
EQUIPMENT. Field vibration balancing is specified in //Section 23 05 
11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC.. 

3.9 SOUND TESTING 

A. Perform and record required sound measurements in accordance with 
Paragraph, QUALITY ASSURANCE in Section 23 05 41, NOISE and VIBRATION 
CONTROL FOR HVAC PIPING and EQUIPMENT. 

B. Take measurements with a calibrated sound level meter and octave band 
analyzer of the accuracy required by AABC or NEBB. 

C. Sound reference levels, formulas and coefficients shall be according to 
ASHRAE Handbook, "HVAC Applications", Chapter 46, SOUND AND VIBRATION 
CONTROL. 

D. Determine compliance with specifications as follows: 

1. When sound pressure levels are specified, including the NC Criteria 
in Section 23 05 41, NOISE and VIBRATION CONTROL FOR HVAC PIPING and 
EQUIPMENT: 


a. Reduce the background noise as much as possible by shutting off 
unrelated audible equipment. 

b. Measure octave band sound pressure levels with specified 
equipment "off." 

c. Measure octave band sound pressure levels with specified 
equipment "on." 

d. Use the DIFFERENCE in corresponding readings to determine the 
sound pressure due to equipment. 

 

DIFFERENCE: 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 to 9 

10 or More 

FACTOR: 

10 

7 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 



 

 Sound pressure level due to equipment equals sound pressure level 
with equipment "on" minus FACTOR. 

e. Plot octave bands of sound pressure level due to equipment for 
typical rooms on a graph which also shows noise criteria (NC) 
curves. 

2. When sound power levels are specified: 

a. Perform steps 1.a. thru 1.d., as above. 

b. For indoor equipment: Determine room attenuating effect, i.e., 
difference between sound power level and sound pressure level. 
Determined sound power level will be the sum of sound pressure 
level due to equipment plus the room attenuating effect. 

E. Where measured sound levels exceed specified level, the installing 
contractor or equipment manufacturer shall take remedial action 
approved by the Resident Engineer and the necessary sound tests shall 
be repeated. 

F. Test readings for sound testing could go higher than 15 percent if 
determination is made by the Resident Engineer based on the recorded 
sound data. 

3.10 MARKING OF SETTINGS 

 Following approval of Tab final Report, the setting of all HVAC 
adjustment devices including valves, splitters and dampers shall be 
permanently marked by the TAB Specialist so that adjustment can be 
restored if disturbed at any time. Style and colors used for markings 
shall be coordinated with the Resident Engineer. 


3.11 IDENTIFICATION OF TEST PORTS 

 The TAB Specialist shall permanently and legibly identify the location 
points of duct test ports. If the ductwork has exterior insulation, the 
identification shall be made on the exterior side of the insulation. 
All penetrations through ductwork and ductwork insulation shall be 
sealed to prevent air leaks and maintain integrity of vapor barrier. 

3.12 PHASING 

A. Phased Projects: Testing and Balancing Work to follow project with 
areas shall be completed per the project phasing. Upon completion of 
the project all areas shall have been tested and balanced per the 
contract documents. 

B. Existing Areas: Systems that serve areas outside of the project scope 
shall not be adversely affected. Measure existing parameters where 
shown to document system capacity. 

3.13 COMMISSIONING 

A. Provide commissioning documentation in accordance with the requirements 
of Section 23 08 00 – COMMISSIONING OF HVAC SYSTEMS for all inspection, 
start up, and contractor testing required above and required by the 
System Readiness Checklist provided by the Commissioning Agent. 

B. Components provided under this section of the specification will be 
tested as part of a larger system. Refer to Section 23 08 00 – 
COMMISSIONING OF HVAC SYSTEMS and related sections for contractor 
responsibilities for system commissioning. 

- - E N D - - - 


SECTION 23 07 11 
HVAC INSULATION 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Field applied insulation for thermal efficiency and condensation 
control for 

1. HVAC piping, ductwork and equipment. 

 2. Re-insulation of HVAC piping, and ductwork after asbestos abatement. 

B. Definitions 

1. ASJ: All service jacket, white finish facing or jacket. 

2. Air conditioned space: Space having air temperature and/or humidity 
controlled by mechanical equipment. 

3. Cold: Equipment, ductwork or piping handling media at design 
temperature of 16 degrees C (60 degrees F) or below. 

4. Concealed: Ductwork and piping above ceilings and in chases, 
interstitial space, and pipe spaces. 

5. FSK: Foil-scrim-kraft facing. 

6. Hot: HVAC Ductwork handling air at design temperature above 16 
degrees C (60 degrees F);HVAC equipment or piping handling media 
above 41 degrees C (105 degrees F). 

7. Density: kg/m3 - kilograms per cubic meter (Pcf - pounds per cubic 
foot). 

8. Runouts: Branch pipe connections up to 25-mm (one-inch) nominal size 
to reheat coils for terminal units. 

 9. Thermal conductance: Heat flow rate through materials. 

a. Flat surface: Watt per square meter (BTU per hour per square 
foot). 

b. Pipe or Cylinder: Watt per square meter (BTU per hour per linear 
foot). 

10. Thermal Conductivity (k): Watt per meter, per degree C (BTU per inch 
thickness, per hour, per square foot, per degree F temperature 
difference). 

11. Vapor Retarder (Vapor Barrier): A material which retards the 
transmission (migration) of water vapor. Performance of the vapor 
retarder is rated in terms of permeance (perms). For the purpose of 
this specification, vapor retarders shall have a maximum published 


permeance of 0.1 perms and vapor barriers shall have a maximum 
published permeance of 0.001 perms. 

12. HHWS: Hot water heating supply. 

13. HHWR: Hot water heating return. 

14. PVDC: Polyvinylidene chloride vapor retarder jacketing, white. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

 A. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING: Mineral fiber and bond breaker behind 
sealant. 

B. Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC: General mechanical 
requirements and items, which are common to more than one section of 
Division 23. 

C. Section 23 05 41, NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL FOR HVAC PIPING and 
EQUIPMENT 

D. Section 23 21 13, HYDRONIC PIPING 

E. Section 23 31 00, HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS: Ductwork, plenum and 
fittings. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Refer to article QUALITY ASSURANCE, in Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK 
RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

B. Criteria: 

1. Comply with NFPA 90A, particularly paragraphs 4.3.3.1 through 
4.3.3.6, 4.3.10.2.6, and 5.4.6.4, parts of which are quoted as 
follows: 

4.3.3.1 Pipe insulation and coverings, duct coverings, duct 
linings, vapor retarder facings, adhesives, fasteners, tapes, and 
supplementary materials added to air ducts, plenums, panels, and 
duct silencers used in duct systems, unless otherwise provided 
for in 4.3.3.1.1 or 4.3.3.1.2., shall have, in the form in 
which they are used, a maximum flame spread index of 25 without 
evidence of continued progressive combustion and a maximum smoke 
developed index of 50 when tested in accordance with NFPA 255, 
Standard Method of Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of 
Building Materials. 

4.3.3.1.1 Where these products are to be applied with adhesives, 
they shall be tested with such adhesives applied, or the 
adhesives used shall have a maximum flame spread index of 25 and 
a maximum smoke developed index of 50 when in the final dry 
state. (See 4.2.4.2.) 

4.3.3.1.2 The flame spread and smoke developed index requirements 
of 4.3.3.1.1 shall not apply to air duct weatherproof coverings 
where they are located entirely outside of a building, do not 
penetrate a wall or roof, and do not create an exposure hazard. 


4.3.3.2 Closure systems for use with rigid and flexible air ducts 
tested in accordance with UL 181, Standard for Safety Factory- 
Made Air Ducts and Air Connectors, shall have been tested, 
listed, and used in accordance with the conditions of their 
listings, in accordance with one of the following: 

(1) UL 181A, Standard for Safety Closure Systems for Use with 
Rigid Air Ducts and Air Connectors 

(2) UL 181B, Standard for Safety Closure Systems for Use with 
Flexible Air Ducts and Air Connectors 

4.3.3.3 Air duct, panel, and plenum coverings and linings, and 
pipe insulation and coverings shall not flame, glow, smolder, or 
smoke when tested in accordance with a similar test for pipe 
covering, ASTM C 411, Standard Test Method for Hot-Surface 
Performance of High-Temperature Thermal Insulation, at the 
temperature to which they are exposed in service. 

4.3.3.3.1 In no case shall the test temperature be below 121°C 
(250°F). 

4.3.3.4 Air duct coverings shall not extend through walls or 
floors that are required to be fire stopped or required to have a 
fire resistance rating, unless such coverings meet the 
requirements of 5.4.6.4. 

4.3.3.5* Air duct linings shall be interrupted at fire dampers to 
prevent interference with the operation of devices. 

4.3.3.6 Air duct coverings shall not be installed so as to 
conceal or prevent the use of any service opening. 

4.3.10.2.6 Materials exposed to the airflow shall be 
noncombustible or limited combustible and have a maximum smoke 
developed index of 50 or comply with the following. 

4.3.10.2.6.1 Electrical wires and cables and optical fiber cables 
shall be listed as noncombustible or limited combustible and have 
a maximum smoke developed index of 50 or shall be listed as 
having a maximum peak optical density of 0.5 or less, an average 
optical density of 0.15 or less, and a maximum flame spread 
distance of 1.5 m (5 ft) or less when tested in accordance 
with NFPA 262, Standard Method of Test for Flame Travel and 
Smoke of Wires and Cables for Use in Air-Handling Spaces. 

4.3.10.2.6.4 Optical-fiber and communication raceways shall be 
listed as having a maximum peak optical density of 0.5 or less, 
an average optical density of 0.15 or less, and a maximum flame 
spread distance of 1.5 m (5 ft) or less when tested in accordance 
with UL 2024, Standard for Safety Optical-Fiber Cable Raceway. 

4.3.10.2.6.6 Supplementary materials for air distribution systems 
shall be permitted when complying with the provisions of 4.3.3. 

5.4.6.4 Where air ducts pass through walls, floors, or partitions 
that are required to have a fire resistance rating and where fire 
dampers are not required, the opening in the construction around 
the air duct shall be as follows: 


(1) Not exceeding a 25.4 mm (1 in.) average clearance on all 
sides 

(2) Filled solid with an approved material capable of 
preventing the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to 
ignite cotton waste when subjected to the time-temperature fire 
conditions required for fire barrier penetration as specified 
in NFPA 251, Standard Methods of Tests of Fire Endurance of 
Building Construction and Materials 

2. Test methods: ASTM E84, UL 723, or NFPA 255. 

3. Specified k factors are at 24 degrees C (75 degrees F) mean 
temperature unless stated otherwise. Where optional thermal 
insulation material is used, select thickness to provide thermal 
conductance no greater than that for the specified material. For 
pipe, use insulation manufacturer's published heat flow tables. For 
domestic hot water supply and return, run out insulation and 
condensation control insulation, no thickness adjustment need be 
made. 

4. All materials shall be compatible and suitable for service 
temperature, and shall not contribute to corrosion or otherwise 
attack surface to which applied in either the wet or dry state. 

C. Every package or standard container of insulation or accessories 
delivered to the job site for use must have a manufacturer's stamp or 
label giving the name of the manufacturer and description of the 
material. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, and SAMPLES. 

B. Shop Drawings: 

1. All information, clearly presented, shall be included to determine 
compliance with drawings and specifications and ASTM, federal and 
military specifications. 

a. Insulation materials: Specify each type used and state surface 
burning characteristics. 

b. Insulation facings and jackets: Each type used. Make it clear 
that white finish will be furnished for exposed ductwork, casings 
and equipment. 

c. Insulation accessory materials: Each type used. 

d. Manufacturer's installation and fitting fabrication instructions 
for flexible unicellular insulation. 


e. Make reference to applicable specification paragraph numbers for 
coordination. 

C. Samples: 

1. Each type of insulation: Minimum size 100 mm (4 inches) square for 
board/block/ blanket; 150 mm (6 inches) long, full diameter for 
round types. 

2. Each type of facing and jacket: Minimum size 100 mm (4 inches 
square). 

3. Each accessory material: Minimum 120 ML (4 ounce) liquid container 
or 120 gram (4 ounce) dry weight for adhesives / cement / mastic. 

1.5 STORAGE AND HANDLING OF MATERIAL 

 Store materials in clean and dry environment, pipe covering jackets 
shall be clean and unmarred. Place adhesives in original containers. 
Maintain ambient temperatures and conditions as required by printed 
instructions of manufacturers of adhesives, mastics and finishing 
cements. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by basic 
designation only. 

B. Federal Specifications (Fed. Spec.): 

L-P-535E (2)- 99........Plastic Sheet (Sheeting): Plastic Strip; Poly 
(Vinyl Chloride) and Poly (Vinyl Chloride - 
Vinyl Acetate), Rigid. 

C. Military Specifications (Mil. Spec.): 

MIL-A-3316C (2)-90......Adhesives, Fire-Resistant, Thermal Insulation 

MIL-A-24179A (1)-87.....Adhesive, Flexible Unicellular-Plastic 
Thermal Insulation 

MIL-C-19565C (1)-88.....Coating Compounds, Thermal Insulation, Fire-and 
Water-Resistant, Vapor-Barrier 

MIL-C-20079H-87.........Cloth, Glass; Tape, Textile Glass; and Thread, 
Glass and Wire-Reinforced Glass 

D. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-99(2004)...........Standard Specification for Stainless and 
Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel Steel Plate, 
Sheet, and Strip 


C411-05.................Standard test method for Hot-Surface 
Performance of High-Temperature Thermal 
Insulation 

C547-07.................Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber pipe 
Insulation 

C552-07.................Standard Specification for Cellular Glass 
Thermal Insulation 

C553-08.................Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber 
Blanket Thermal Insulation for Commercial and 
Industrial Applications 

C585-09.................Standard Practice for Inner and Outer Diameters 
of Rigid Thermal Insulation for Nominal Sizes 
of Pipe and Tubing (NPS System) R (1998) 

C612-10.................Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Block 
and Board Thermal Insulation 

C1126-04................Standard Specification for Faced or Unfaced 
Rigid Cellular Phenolic Thermal Insulation 

C1136-10................Standard Specification for Flexible, Low 
Permeance Vapor Retarders for Thermal 
Insulation 

E84-10..................Standard Test Method for Surface Burning 
Characteristics of Building 

Materials 

E119-09c................Standard Test Method for Fire Tests of Building 
Construction and Materials 

E. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

90A-09..................Standard for the Installation of Air 
Conditioning and Ventilating Systems 

96-08...................Standards for Ventilation Control and Fire 
Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations 

101-09..................Life Safety Code 

251-06..................Standard methods of Tests of Fire Endurance of 
Building Construction Materials 

255-06..................Standard Method of tests of Surface Burning 
Characteristics of Building Materials 

F. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc (UL): 


723.....................UL Standard for Safety Test for Surface Burning 
Characteristics of Building Materials with 
Revision of 09/08 

G. Manufacturer’s Standardization Society of the Valve and Fitting 
Industry (MSS): 

SP58-2009...............Pipe Hangers and Supports Materials, Design, 
and Manufacture 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MINERAL FIBER OR FIBER GLASS 

A. ASTM C612 (Board, Block), Class 1 or 2, density 48 kg/m3 (3 pcf), k = 
0.037 (0.26) at 24 degrees C (75 degrees F), external insulation for 
temperatures up to 204 degrees C (400 degrees F) with foil scrim (FSK) 
facing. 

B. ASTM C553 (Blanket, Flexible) Type I, // Class B-3, Density 16 kg/m3 (1 
pcf), k = 0.045 (0.31) // Class B-5, Density 32 kg/m3 (2 pcf), k = 0.04 
(0.27) // at 24 degrees C (75 degrees F), for use at temperatures up to 
204 degrees C (400 degrees F) with foil scrim (FSK) facing. 

C. ASTM C547 (Pipe Fitting Insulation and Preformed Pipe Insulation), 
Class 1, k = 0.037 (0.26) at 24 degrees C (75 degrees F), for use at 
temperatures up to 230 degrees C (450 degrees F) with an all service 
vapor retarder jacket with polyvinyl chloride premolded fitting 
covering. 

2.2 RIGID CELLULAR PHENOLIC FOAM 

A. Preformed (molded) pipe insulation, ASTM C1126, type III, grade 1, k = 
0.021(0.15) at 10 degrees C (50 degrees F), for use at temperatures up 
to 121 degrees C (250 degrees F) with all service vapor retarder jacket 
with polyvinyl chloride premolded fitting covering. 

B. Equipment and Duct Insulation, ASTM C 1126, type II, grade 1, k = 0.021 
(0.15) at 10 degrees C (50 degrees F), for use at temperatures up to 
121 degrees C (250 degrees F) with rigid cellular phenolic insulation 
and covering, and all service vapor retarder jacket. 

2.3 POLYISOCYANURATE CLOSED-CELL RIGID 

A. Preformed (fabricated) pipe insulation, ASTM C591, type IV, 
K=0.027(0.19) at 24 degrees C (75 degrees F), flame spread not over 25, 
smoke developed not over 50, for use at temperatures up to 149 degree C 
(300 degree F) with factory applied PVDC or all service vapor retarder 
jacket with polyvinyl chloride premolded fitting covers. 


B. Equipment and duct insulation, ASTM C 591,type IV, K=0.027(0.19) at 24 
degrees C (75 degrees F), for use at temperatures up to 149 degrees C 
(300 degrees F) with PVDC or all service jacket vapor retarder jacket. 

 

2.9 INSULATION FACINGS AND JACKETS 

A. Vapor Retarder, higher strength with low water permeance = 0.02 or less 
perm rating, Beach puncture 50 units for insulation facing on exposed 
ductwork, casings and equipment, and for pipe insulation jackets. 
Facings and jackets shall be all service type (ASJ) or PVDC Vapor 
Retarder jacketing. 

B. ASJ jacket shall be white kraft bonded to 0.025 mm (1 mil) thick 
aluminum foil, fiberglass reinforced, with pressure sensitive adhesive 
closure. Comply with ASTM C1136. Beach puncture 50 units, Suitable for 
painting without sizing. Jackets shall have minimum 40 mm (1-1/2 inch) 
lap on longitudinal joints and minimum 75 mm (3 inch) butt strip on end 
joints. Butt strip material shall be same as the jacket. Lap and butt 
strips shall be self-sealing type with factory-applied pressure 
sensitive adhesive. 

C. Vapor Retarder medium strength with low water vapor permeance of 0.02 
or less perm rating), Beach puncture 25 units: Foil-Scrim-Kraft (FSK) 
or PVDC vapor retarder jacketing type for concealed ductwork and 
equipment. 

D. Field applied vapor barrier jackets shall be provided, in addition to 
the specified facings and jackets, on all ductwork as well as on 
interior piping and ductwork exposed to outdoor air. The vapor barrier 
jacket shall consist of a multi-layer laminated cladding with a maximum 
water vapor permeance of 0.001 perms. The minimum puncture resistance 
shall be 35 cm-kg (30 inch-pounds) for interior locations and 92 cm-kg 
(80 inch-pounds) for exterior or exposed locations or where the 
insulation is subject to damage. 

E. Factory composite materials may be used provided that they have been 
tested and certified by the manufacturer. 

F. Pipe fitting insulation covering (jackets): Fitting covering shall be 
premolded to match shape of fitting and shall be polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) conforming to Fed Spec L-P-335, composition A, Type II Grade GU, 
and Type III, minimum thickness 0.7 mm (0.03 inches). Provide color 
matching vapor retarder pressure sensitive tape. 


2.10 PIPE COVERING PROTECTION SADDLES 

A. Cold pipe support: Premolded pipe insulation 180 degrees (half-shells) 
on bottom half of pipe at supports. Material shall be cellular glass or 
high density Polyisocyanurate insulation of the same thickness as 
adjacent insulation. Density of Polyisocyanurate insulation shall be a 
minimum of 48 kg/m3 (3.0 pcf). 

Nominal Pipe Size and Accessories Material (Insert Blocks) 

Nominal Pipe Size mm (inches) 

Insert Blocks mm (inches) 

Up through 125 (5) 

150 (6) long 

150 (6) 

150 (6) long 

200 (8), 250 (10), 300 (12) 

225 (9) long 

350 (14), 400 (16) 

300 (12) long 

450 through 600 (18 through 24) 

350 (14) long 



 

B. Warm or hot pipe supports: Premolded pipe insulation (180 degree halfshells) 
on bottom half of pipe at supports. Material shall be high 
density Polyisocyanurate (for temperatures up to 149 degrees C [300 
degrees F]), cellular glass or calcium silicate. Insulation at 
supports shall have same thickness as adjacent insulation. Density of 
Polyisocyanurate insulation shall be a minimum of 48 kg/m3 (3.0 pcf). 

2.11 ADHESIVE, MASTIC, CEMENT 

A. Mil. Spec. MIL-A-3316, Class 1: Jacket and lap adhesive and protective 
finish coating for insulation. 

B. Mil. Spec. MIL-A-3316, Class 2: Adhesive for laps and for adhering 
insulation to metal surfaces. 

C. Mil. Spec. MIL-A-24179, Type II Class 1: Adhesive for installing 
flexible unicellular insulation and for laps and general use. 

D. Mil. Spec. MIL-C-19565, Type I: Protective finish for outdoor use. 

E. Mil. Spec. MIL-C-19565, Type I or Type II: Vapor barrier compound for 
indoor use. 

F. ASTM C449: Mineral fiber hydraulic-setting thermal insulating and 
finishing cement. 

G. Other: Insulation manufacturers' published recommendations. 


2.12 MECHANICAL FASTENERS 

A. Pins, anchors: Welded pins, or metal or nylon anchors with galvanized 
steel-coated or fiber washer, or clips. Pin diameter shall be as 
recommended by the insulation manufacturer. 

B. Staples: Outward clinching galvanized steel. 

C. Wire: 1.3 mm thick (18 gage) soft annealed galvanized or 1.9 mm (14 
gage) copper clad steel or nickel copper alloy. 

D. Bands: 13 mm (0.5 inch) nominal width, brass, galvanized steel, 
aluminum or stainless steel. 

2.13 REINFORCEMENT AND FINISHES 

A. Glass fabric, open weave: ASTM D1668, Type III (resin treated) and Type 
I (asphalt treated). 

B. Glass fiber fitting tape: Mil. Spec MIL-C-20079, Type II, Class 1. 

C. Hexagonal wire netting: 25 mm (one inch) mesh, 0.85 mm thick (22 gage) 
galvanized steel. 

D. Corner beads: 50 mm (2 inch) by 50 mm (2 inch), 0.55 mm thick (26 gage) 
galvanized steel; or, 25 mm (1 inch) by 25 mm (1 inch), 0.47 mm thick 
(28 gage) aluminum angle adhered to 50 mm (2 inch) by 50 mm (2 inch) 
Kraft paper. 

E. PVC fitting cover: Fed. Spec L-P-535, Composition A, 11-86 Type II, 
Grade GU, with Form B Mineral Fiber insert, for media temperature 4 
degrees C (40 degrees F) to 121 degrees C (250 degrees F). Below 4 
degrees C (40 degrees F) and above 121 degrees C (250 degrees F). 
Provide double layer insert. Provide color matching vapor barrier 
pressure sensitive tape. 

2.14 FIRESTOPPING MATERIAL 

 Other than pipe and duct insulation, refer to Section 07 84 00 
FIRESTOPPING. 

2.15 FLAME AND SMOKE 

 Unless shown otherwise all assembled systems shall meet flame spread 25 
and smoke developed 50 rating as developed under ASTM, NFPA and UL 
standards and specifications. See paragraph 1.3 "Quality Assurance". 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

A. Required pressure tests of duct and piping joints and connections shall 
be completed and the work approved by the Resident Engineer for 


application of insulation. Surface shall be clean and dry with all 
foreign materials, such as dirt, oil, loose scale and rust removed. 

B. Except for specific exceptions, insulate entire specified equipment, 
piping (pipe, fittings, valves, accessories), and duct systems. 
Insulate each pipe and duct individually. Do not use scrap pieces of 
insulation where a full length section will fit. 

 C. Where removal of insulation of piping, ductwork and equipment is 
required to comply with Section 02 82 11, TRADITIONAL ASBESTOS 
ABATEMENT such areas shall be reinsulated to comply with this 
specification. 

D. Insulation materials shall be installed in a first class manner with 
smooth and even surfaces, with jackets and facings drawn tight and 
smoothly cemented down at all laps. Insulation shall be continuous 
through all sleeves and openings, except at fire dampers and duct 
heaters (NFPA 90A). Vapor retarders shall be continuous and 
uninterrupted throughout systems with operating temperature 16 degrees 
C (60 degrees F) and below. Lap and seal vapor retarder over ends and 
exposed edges of insulation. Anchors, supports and other metal 
projections through insulation on cold surfaces shall be insulated and 
vapor sealed for a minimum length of 150 mm (6 inches). 

E. Install vapor stops at all insulation terminations on either side of 
valves, pumps and equipment and particularly in straight lengths of 
pipe insulation. 

F. Insulation on hot piping and equipment shall be terminated square at 
items not to be insulated, access openings and nameplates. Cover all 
exposed raw insulation with white sealer or jacket material. 

H. Protect all insulations outside of buildings with aluminum jacket using 
lock joint or other approved system for a continuous weather tight 
system. Access doors and other items requiring maintenance or access 
shall be removable and sealable. 

I. HVAC work not to be insulated: 

1. Internally insulated ductwork and air handling units. 

2. Exhaust air ducts. 

3. In hot piping: Unions, flexible connectors, control valves, PRVs, 
safety valves and discharge vent piping. Insulate piping to within 
approximately 75 mm (3 inches) of uninsulated items. 


J. Apply insulation materials subject to the manufacturer's recommended 
temperature limits. Apply adhesives, mastic and coatings at the 
manufacturer's recommended minimum coverage. 

K. Elbows, flanges and other fittings shall be insulated with the same 
material as is used on the pipe straights. The elbow or fitting 
insulation shall be field-fabricated, mitered or factory prefabricated 
to the necessary size and shape to fit. Use of polyurethane spray-foam 
to fill a PVC elbow jacket is prohibited on cold applications. 

L. Firestop Pipe and Duct insulation: 

1. Provide firestopping insulation at fire and smoke barriers through 
penetrations. Fire stopping insulation shall be UL listed as defines 
in Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

2. Pipe and duct penetrations requiring fire stop insulation including, 
but not limited to the following: 

a. Pipe risers through floors 

b. Pipe or duct chase walls and floors 

c. Smoke partitions 

d. Fire partitions 

M. Provide vapor barrier jackets over insulation as follows: 

1. All interior piping and ducts conveying fluids exposed to outdoor 
air 

3.2 INSULATION INSTALLATION 

A. Mineral Fiber Board: 

1. Faced board: Apply board on pins spaced not more than 300 mm (12 
inches) on center each way, and not less than 75 mm (3 inches) from 
each edge of board. In addition to pins, apply insulation bonding 
adhesive to entire underside of horizontal metal surfaces. Butt 
insulation edges tightly and seal all joints with laps and butt 
strips. After applying speed clips cut pins off flush and apply 
vapor seal patches over clips. 

2. Exposed, unlined ductwork and equipment in mechanical rooms: 

a. 50 mm (2 inch) thick insulation faced with ASJ (white all service 
jacket): Supply air duct. 

b. 50 mm (2 inch) thick insulation faced with ASJ: Return air duct. 

c. Outside air intake ducts: 25 mm(one inch) thick insulation faced 
with ASJ. 


B. Flexible Mineral Fiber Blanket: 

1. Adhere insulation to metal with 75 mm (3 inch) wide strips of 
insulation bonding adhesive at 200 mm (8 inches) on center all 
around duct. Additionally secure insulation to bottom of ducts 
exceeding 600 mm (24 inches) in width with pins welded or adhered on 
450 mm (18 inch) centers. Secure washers on pins. Butt insulation 
edges and seal joints with laps and butt strips. Staples may be used 
to assist in securing insulation. Seal all vapor retarder 
penetrations with mastic. Sagging duct insulation will not be 
acceptable. Install firestop duct insulation where required. 

2. Supply and Return air ductwork to be insulated includes main and 
branch ducts from AHU discharge to room supply outlets, and the 
bodies of ceiling outlets to prevent condensation. Insulate sound 
attenuator units, coil casings and damper frames. 

C. Molded Mineral Fiber Pipe and Tubing Covering: 

1. Fit insulation to pipe or duct, aligning longitudinal joints. Seal 
longitudinal joint laps and circumferential butt strips by rubbing 
hard with a nylon sealing tool to assure a positive seal. Staples 
may be used to assist in securing insulation. Seal all vapor 
retarder penetrations on cold piping with a generous application of 
vapor barrier mastic. Provide inserts and install with metal 
insulation shields at outside pipe supports. Install freeze 
protection insulation over heating cable. 

2. Contractor's options for fitting, flange and valve insulation: 

a. Insulating and finishing cement for sizes less than 100 mm (4 
inches) operating at surface temperature of 16 degrees C (61 
degrees F) or more. 

b. Factory premolded, one piece PVC covers with mineral fiber, (Form 
B), inserts. Provide two insert layers for pipe temperatures 
below 4 degrees C (40 degrees F), or above 121 degrees C (250 
degrees F). Secure first layer of insulation with twine. Seal 
seam edges with vapor barrier mastic and secure with fitting 
tape. 

c. Factory molded, ASTM C547 or field mitered sections, joined with 
adhesive or wired in place. For hot piping finish with a 
smoothing coat of finishing cement. For cold fittings, 16 degrees 
C (60 degrees F) or less, vapor seal with a layer of glass 


fitting tape imbedded between two 2 mm (1/16 inch) coats of vapor 
barrier mastic. 

d. Fitting tape shall extend over the adjacent pipe insulation and 
overlap on itself at least 50 mm (2 inches). 

3. Nominal thickness in millimeters and inches specified in the 
schedule at the end of this section. 

D. Rigid Cellular Phenolic Foam: 

1. Rigid closed cell phenolic insulation may be provided for piping, 
ductwork and equipment for temperatures up to 121 degrees C (250 
degrees F). 

2. Note the NFPA 90A burning characteristics requirements of 25/50 in 
paragraph 1.3.B 

3. Provide secure attachment facilities such as welding pins. 

4. Apply insulation with joints tightly drawn together 

5. Apply adhesives, coverings, neatly finished at fittings, and valves. 

6. Final installation shall be smooth, tight, neatly finished at all 
edges. 

7. Minimum thickness in millimeters (inches) specified in the schedule 
at the end of this section. 

8. Exposed, unlined supply and return ductwork exposed to outdoor 
weather: 50 mm (2 inch) thick insulation faced with a multi-layer 
vapor barrier with a maximum water vapor permeance of 0.00 perms. 

9. Condensation control insulation: Minimum 25 mm (1.0 inch) thick for 
all pipe sizes. 

a. HVAC: Cooling coil condensation piping to waste piping fixture or 
drain inlet. Omit insulation on plastic piping in mechanical 
rooms. 

F. Polyisocyanurate Closed-Cell Rigid Insulation: 

1. Polyisocyanurate closed-cell rigid insulation (PIR) may be provided 
for crawl space piping for temperature up to 149 degree C (300 
degree F). 

2. Install insulation, vapor barrier and jacketing per manufacturer’s 
recommendations. Particular attention should be paid to 
recommendations for joint staggering, adhesive application, external 
hanger design, expansion/contraction joint design and spacing and 
vapor barrier integrity. 

3. Install insulation with all joints tightly butted (except expansion) 
joints in hot applications). 


4. If insulation thickness exceeds 63 mm (2.5 inches), install as a 
double layer system with longitudinal (lap) and butt joint 
staggering as recommended by manufacturer. 

5. For cold applications, vapor barrier shall be installed in a 
continuous manner. No staples, rivets, screws or any other 
attachment device capable of penetrating the vapor barrier shall be 
used to attach the vapor barrier or jacketing. No wire ties capable 
of penetrating the vapor barrier shall be used to hold the 
insulation in place. Banding shall be used to attach PVC or metal 
jacketing. 

6. Elbows, flanges and other fittings shall be insulated with the same 
material as is used on the pipe straights. The elbow/ fitting 
insulation shall be field-fabricated, mitered or factory 
prefabricated to the necessary size and shape to fit on the elbow/ 
fitting. Use of polyurethane spray-foam to fill PVC elbow jacket is 
prohibited on cold applications. 

7. For cold applications, the vapor barrier on elbows/fittings shall be 
either mastic-fabric-mastic or 2 mil thick PVDC vapor barrier 
adhesive tape. 

8. All PVC jacketing shall be installed so as to naturally shed water. 
Joints shall point down and shall be sealed with either adhesive or 
caulking (except for periodic slip joints). 

9. Crawl space piping: Follow instructions for above ground piping but 
the vapor retarder jacketing shall be 6 mil thick PVDC or minimum 30 
mil thick rubberized bituminous membrane. Sand bed and backfill 
shall be a minimum of 150 mm (6 inches) all around insulated pipe. 

10. Note the NFPA 90A burning characteristic requirements of 25/50 in 
paragraph 1.3B. Refer to paragraph 3.1 for items not to be 
insulated. 

12. Minimum thickness in millimeter (inches) specified in the schedule 
at the end of this section. 

 

G. Flexible Elastomeric Cellular Thermal Insulation: 

1. Apply insulation and fabricate fittings in accordance with the 
manufacturer's installation instructions and finish with two coats 
of weather resistant finish as recommended by the insulation 
manufacturer. 


2. Pipe and tubing insulation: 

a. Use proper size material. Do not stretch or strain insulation. 

b. To avoid undue compression of insulation, provide cork stoppers 
or wood inserts at supports as recommended by the insulation 
manufacturer. Insulation shields are specified under Section 
23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

c. Where possible, slip insulation over the pipe or tubing prior to 
connection, and seal the butt joints with adhesive. Where the 
slip-on technique is not possible, slit the insulation and apply 
it to the pipe sealing the seam and joints with contact adhesive. 
Optional tape sealing, as recommended by the manufacturer, may be 
employed. Make changes from mineral fiber insulation in a 
straight run of pipe, not at a fitting. Seal joint with tape. 

3. Apply sheet insulation to flat or large curved surfaces with 100 
percent adhesive coverage. For fittings and large pipe, apply 
adhesive to seams only. 

4. Pipe insulation: nominal thickness in millimeters (inches as 
specified in the schedule at the end of this section. 

3.8 PIPE INSULATION SCHEDULE 

Provide insulation for piping systems as scheduled below: 

Insulation Thickness Millimeters (Inches) 

 

Nominal Pipe Size Millimeters (Inches) 

Operating 
Temperature 
Range/Service 

Insulation 
Material 

Less 
than 

25 (1) 

25 – 32 
(1 – 1¼) 

38 – 75 

(1½ - 3) 

100 (4) 
and Above 

38-99 degrees C 

(100-211 degrees F) 

(HHWS, HHWR) 

Rigid Cellular 
Phenolic Foam 

38 
(1.5) 

38 (1.5) 

50 (2.0) 

50 (2.0) 

39-99 degrees C 
(100-211 degrees F) 

(HHWS, HHWR) 

(Where Underground) 

Polyisocyanurate 
Closed-Cell 
Rigid 

38 
(1.5) 

38 (1.5) 

 ---- 

 ---- 



 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 23 08 00 

COMMISSIONING OF HVAC SYSTEMS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. The requirements of this Section apply to all sections of Division 23. 

B. This project will have selected building systems commissioned. The 
complete list of equipment and systems to be commissioned is specified 
in Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. The 
commissioning process, which the Contractor is responsible to execute, 
is defined in Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIRMENTS. A 
Commissioning Agent (CxA) appointed by the VA will manage the 
commissioning process. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 00 00 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
B. Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. 
C. Section 01 33 23 SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 


1.3 SUMMARY 

A. This Section includes requirements for commissioning the Facility 
exterior closure, related subsystems and related equipment. This 
Section supplements the general requirements specified in Section 01 91 
00 General Commissioning Requirements. 

B. Refer to Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS for more 
details regarding processes and procedures as well as roles and 
responsibilities for all Commissioning Team members. 

1.4 DEFINITIONS 

A. Refer to Section 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS for 
definitions. 

1.5 COMMISSIONED SYSTEMS 

A. Commissioning of a system or systems specified in Division 23 is part 
of the construction process. Documentation and testing of these 
systems, as well as training of the VA’s Operation and Maintenance 
personnel in accordance with the requirements of Section 01 91 00 and 
of Division 23, is required in cooperation with the VA and the 
Commissioning Agent. 

B. The Facility exterior closure systems commissioning will include the 
systems listed in Section 01 19 00 General Commissioning Requirements: 


1.6 SUBMITTALS 

A. The commissioning process requires review of selected Submittals that 
pertain to the systems to be commissioned. The Commissioning Agent 
will provide a list of submittals that will be reviewed by the 
Commissioning Agent. This list will be reviewed and approved by the VA 
prior to forwarding to the Contractor. Refer to Section 01 33 23 SHOP 
DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, and SAMPLES for further details. 

B. The commissioning process requires Submittal review simultaneously with 
engineering review. Specific submittal requirements related to the 
commissioning process are specified in Section 01 91 00 GENERAL 
COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS 

A. Commissioning of HVAC systems will require inspection of individual 
elements of the HVAC systems construction throughout the construction 
period. The Contractor shall coordinate with the Commissioning Agent 
in accordance with Section 01 19 00 and the Commissioning plan to 
schedule HVAC systems inspections as required to support the 
Commissioning Process. 

3.2 PRE-FUNCTIONAL CHECKLISTS 

A. The Contractor shall complete Pre-Functional Checklists to verify 
systems, subsystems, and equipment installation is complete and systems 
are ready for Systems Functional Performance Testing. The 
Commissioning Agent will prepare Pre-Functional Checklists to be used 
to document equipment installation. The Contractor shall complete the 
checklists. Completed checklists shall be submitted to the VA and to 
the Commissioning Agent for review. The Commissioning Agent may spot 
check a sample of completed checklists. If the Commissioning Agent 
determines that the information provided on the checklist is not 
accurate, the Commissioning Agent will return the marked-up checklist 
to the Contractor for correction and resubmission. If the 
Commissioning Agent determines that a significant number of completed 
checklists for similar equipment are not accurate, the Commissioning 
Agent will select a broader sample of checklists for review. If the 
Commissioning Agent determines that a significant number of the broader 
sample of checklists is also inaccurate, all the checklists for the 
type of equipment will be returned to the Contractor for correction and 


resubmission. Refer to SECTION 01 91 00 GENERAL COMMISSIONING 
REQUIREMENTS for submittal requirements for Pre-Functional Checklists, 
Equipment Startup Reports, and other commissioning documents. 

3.3 CONTRACTORS TESTS 

A. Contractor tests as required by other sections of Division 23 shall be 
scheduled and documented in accordance with Section 01 00 00 GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS. All testing shall be incorporated into the project 
schedule. Contractor shall provide no less than 7 calendar days’ 
notice of testing. The Commissioning Agent will witness selected 
Contractor tests at the sole discretion of the Commissioning Agent. 
Contractor tests shall be completed prior to scheduling Systems 
Functional Performance Testing. 

3.4 SYSTEMS FUNCTIONAL PERFORMANCE TESTING: 

A. The Commissioning Process includes Systems Functional Performance 
Testing that is intended to test systems functional performance under 
steady state conditions, to test system reaction to changes in 
operating conditions, and system performance under emergency 
conditions. The Commissioning Agent will prepare detailed Systems 
Functional Performance Test procedures for review and approval by the 
Resident Engineer. The Contractor shall review and comment on the 
tests prior to approval. The Contractor shall provide the required 
labor, materials, and test equipment identified in the test procedure 
to perform the tests. The Commissioning Agent will witness and 
document the testing. The Contractor shall sign the test reports to 
verify tests were performed. See Section 01 91 00 GENERAL 
COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS, for additional details. 

----- END ----- 

 

 


SECTION 23 21 13 
HYDRONIC PIPING 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Water piping to connect HVAC equipment, including the following: 

1. heating hot water 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

B. Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, and SAMPLES. 

 C. Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STRUCTURAL 
COMPONENTS: Seismic restraints for piping. 

D. Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC and STEAM GENERATION: 
General mechanical requirements and items, which are common to more 
than one section of Division 23. 

E. Section 23 07 11, HVAC,: Piping 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC, which includes welding 
qualifications. 

B. Submit prior to welding of steel piping a certificate of Welder’s 
certification. The certificate shall be current and not more than one 
year old. 

C. All grooved joint couplings, fittings, valves, and specialties shall be 
the products of a single manufacturer. Grooving tools shall be the 
same manufacturer as the grooved components. 

1. All castings used for coupling housings, fittings, valve bodies, 
etc., shall be date stamped for quality assurance and traceability. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, and SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Pipe and tubing, with specification, class or type, and schedule. 

2. Pipe fittings, including miscellaneous adapters and special 
fittings. 

3. Flanges, gaskets and bolting. 

4. Grooved joint couplings and fittings. 

5. Valves of all types. 

6. Strainers. 


7. Flexible connectors for water service. 

8. Pipe alignment guides. 

9. Expansion joints. 

10. Expansion compensators. 

11. All specified hydronic system components. 

12. Water flow measuring devices. 

13. Gages. 

14. Thermometers and test wells. 

 15. Seismic bracing details for piping. 

C. Submit the welder’s qualifications in the form of a current (less than 
one year old) and formal certificate. 

D. Coordination Drawings: Refer to Article, SUBMITTALS of Section 23 05 
11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

E. As-Built Piping Diagrams: Provide drawing as follows for heating hot 
water system and other piping systems and equipment. 

1. One wall-mounted stick file with complete set of prints. Mount stick 
file in the chiller plant or control room along with control diagram 
stick file. 

2. One complete set of reproducible drawings. 

3. One complete set of drawings in electronic Autocad and pdf format. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. American National Standards Institute, Inc. 

B. American Society of Mechanical Engineers/American National Standards 
Institute, Inc. (ASME/ANSI): 

B16.23-02...............Cast Copper Alloy Solder joint Drainage 
fittings 

B40.100-05..............Pressure Gauges and Gauge Attachments 

C. American National Standards Institute, Inc./Fluid Controls Institute 
(ANSI/FCI): 

70-2-2006...............Control Valve Seat Leakage 

D. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

 

B16.18-01...............Cast Copper Alloy Solder Joint Pressure 
Fittings 

B16.22-01...............Wrought Copper and Bronze Solder Joint Pressure 
Fittings. 


E. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A183-03 ................ Standard Specification for Carbon Steel Track 
Bolts and Nuts 

A307-07 ................ Standard Specification for Carbon Steel Bolts 
and Studs, 60,000 PSI Tensile Strength 

B32-08 ................. Standard Specification for Solder Metal 

B62-02 ................. Standard Specification for Composition Bronze or 
Ounce Metal Castings 

B88-03 ................. Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Water 
Tube 

F. American Water Works Association (AWWA): 

C110-08.................Ductile Iron and Grey Iron Fittings for Water 

C203-02.................Coal Tar Protective Coatings and Linings for 
Steel Water Pipe Lines Enamel and Tape Hot 
Applied 

G. American Welding Society (AWS): 

B2.1-02.................Standard Welding Procedure Specification 

H. Copper Development Association, Inc. (CDA): 

CDA A4015-06............Copper Tube Handbook 

H. Manufacturers Standardization Society (MSS) of the Valve and Fitting 
Industry, Inc.: 

SP-110-96...............Ball Valves Threaded, Socket-Welding, Solder 
Joint, Grooved and Flared Ends 

I. National Sanitation Foundation/American National Standards Institute, 
Inc. (NSF/ANSI): 

14-06...................Plastic Piping System Components and Related 
Materials 

J. Tubular Exchanger Manufacturers Association: TEMA 9th Edition, 2007 

1.6 SPARE PARTS 

A. For mechanical pressed sealed fittings provide tools required for each 
pipe size used at the facility. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 PIPE AND EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS, PIPE SLEEVES, AND WALL AND CEILING PLATES 

A. Provide in accordance with Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR 
HVAC. 

 

2.2 FITTINGS FOR COPPER TUBING 

A. Joints: 


1. Solder Joints: Joints shall be made up in accordance with 
recommended practices of the materials applied. Apply 95/5 tin and 
antimony on all copper piping. 

2. Mechanically formed tee connection in water and drain piping: Form 
mechanically extracted collars in a continuous operation by drilling 
pilot hole and drawing out tube surface to form collar, having a 
height of not less than three times the thickness of tube wall. 
Adjustable collaring device shall insure proper tolerance and 
complete uniformity of the joint. Notch and dimple joining branch 
tube in a single process to provide free flow where the branch tube 
penetrates the fitting. 

B. Bronze Flanges and Flanged Fittings: ASME B16.24. 

C. Fittings: ANSI/ASME B16.18 cast copper or ANSI/ASME B16.22 solder 
wrought copper. 

2.3 DIELECTRIC FITTINGS 

A. Provide where copper tubing and ferrous metal pipe are joined. 

B. 50 mm (2 inches) and Smaller: Threaded dielectric union, ASME B16.39. 

C. 65 mm (2 1/2 inches) and Larger: Flange union with dielectric gasket 
and bolt sleeves, ASME B16.42. 

D. Temperature Rating, 99 degrees C (210 degrees F). 

E. Contractor’s option: On pipe sizes 2” and smaller, screwed end brass 
ball valves // or dielectric nipples// may be used in lieu of 
dielectric unions. 

2.4 SCREWED JOINTS 

A. Pipe Thread: ANSI B1.20. 

B. Lubricant or Sealant: Oil and graphite or other compound approved for 
the intended service. 

 

2.5 VALVES 

A. Asbestos packing is not acceptable. 

B. All valves of the same type shall be products of a single manufacturer. 

C. Shut-Off Valves 

1. Ball Valves (Pipe sizes 2” and smaller): MSS-SP 110, screwed or 
solder connections, brass or bronze body with chrome-plated ball 
with full port and Teflon seat at 2760 kPa (400 psig) working 
pressure rating. Provide stem extension to allow operation without 
interfering with pipe insulation. 

 


D. Globe Valves 

1. Globe Valves 

a. 50 mm (2 inches) and smaller: MSS-SP 80, bronze, 1034 kPa (150 
lb.) Globe valves shall be union bonnet with metal plug type 
disc. 

E. Check Valves 

1. Swing Check Valves: 

a. 50 mm (2 inches) and smaller: MSS-SP 80, bronze, 1034 kPa (150 
lb.), 45 degree swing disc. 

F. Water Flow Balancing Valves: For flow regulation and shut-off. Valves 
shall be line size rather than reduced to control valve size. 

1. Globe style valve. 

2. A dual purpose flow balancing valve and adjustable flow meter, with 
bronze or, calibrated position pointer, valved pressure taps or 
quick disconnects with integral check valves and preformed 
polyurethane insulating enclosure. 

3. Provide a readout kit including flow meter, readout probes, hoses, 
flow charts or calculator, and carrying case. 

 

2.6 STRAINERS 

A. Basket Type. 

1. Screens: Bronze, monel metal or 18-8 stainless steel, free area not 
less than 2-1/2 times pipe area, with perforations as follows: 1.1 
mm (0.045 inch) diameter perforations for 100 mm (4 inches) and 
larger: 3.2 mm (0.125 inch) diameter perforations. 

B. Suction Diffusers: Specified in Section 23 21 23, HYDRONIC PUMPS. 

 

C. Pressure Reducing Valve (Water): Diaphragm or bellows operated, spring 
loaded type, with minimum adjustable range of 28 kPa (4 psig) above and 
below set point. Bronze, brass or iron body and bronze, brass or 
stainless steel trim, rated 861 kPa (125 psig) working pressure at 107 
degrees C (225 degrees F). 

2.7 GAGES, PRESSURE AND COMPOUND 

A. ASME B40.100, Accuracy Grade 1A, (pressure, vacuum, or compound for 
air, oil or water), initial mid-scale accuracy 1 percent of scale 
(Qualify grade), metal or phenolic case, 115 mm (4-1/2 inches) in 
diameter, 6 mm (1/4 inch) NPT bottom connection, white dial with black 
graduations and pointer, clear glass or acrylic plastic window, 


suitable for board mounting. Provide red "set hand" to indicate normal 
working pressure. 

B. Provide brass lever handle union cock. Provide brass/bronze pressure 
snubber for gages in water service. 

C. Range of Gages: Provide range equal to at least 130 percent of normal 
operating range. 

2.8 THERMOMETERS 

A. Mercury or organic liquid filled type, red or blue column, clear 
plastic window, with 150 mm (6 inch) brass stem, straight, fixed or 
adjustable angle as required for each in reading. 

B. Case: Chrome plated brass or aluminum with enamel finish. 

C. Scale: Not less than 225 mm (9 inches), range as described below, two 
degree graduations. 

D. Separable Socket (Well): Brass, extension neck type to clear pipe 
insulation. 

E. Scale ranges: 

1. Hot Water and Glycol-Water: -1 – 116 degrees C (30-240 degrees F). 

2.9 FIRESTOPPING MATERIAL 

Refer to Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 GENERAL 

A. The drawings show the general arrangement of pipe and equipment but do 
not show all required fittings and offsets that may be necessary to 
connect pipes to heating hot water coils, and to coordinate with other 
trades. Provide all necessary fittings, offsets and pipe runs based on 
field measurements and at no additional cost to the government. 
Coordinate with other trades for space available and relative location 
of HVAC equipment and accessories to be connected on ceiling grid. Pipe 
location on the drawings shall be altered by contractor where necessary 
to avoid interferences and clearance difficulties. 

B. Store materials to avoid excessive exposure to weather or foreign 
materials. Keep inside of piping relatively clean during installation 
and protect open ends when work is not in progress. 

C. Support piping securely. Refer to PART 3, Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK 
RESULTS FOR HVAC and. 

D. Install piping generally parallel to walls and column center lines, 
unless shown otherwise on the drawings. Space piping, including 
insulation, to provide 25 mm (one inch) minimum clearance between 


adjacent piping or other surface. Unless shown otherwise, slope drain 
piping down in the direction of flow not less than 25 mm (one inch) in 
12 m (40 feet). Provide eccentric reducers to keep bottom of sloped 
piping flat. 

E. Locate and orient valves to permit proper operation and access for 
maintenance of packing, seat and disc. Generally locate valve stems in 
overhead piping in horizontal position. Provide a union adjacent to one 
end of all threaded end valves. Control valves usually require reducers 
to connect to pipe sizes shown on the drawing. 

F. Offset equipment connections to allow valving off for maintenance and 
repair with minimal removal of piping. Provide flexibility in equipment 
connections and branch line take-offs with 3-elbow swing joints where 
noted on the drawings. 

G. Tee water piping runouts or branches into the side of mains or other 
branches. Avoid bull-head tees, which are two return lines entering 
opposite ends of a tee and exiting out the common side. 

H. Provide manual air vent at all piping system high points and drain 
valves at all low points. I. Connect piping to equipment as shown on 
the drawings. Install components furnished by others such as: 

2. Flow elements (orifice unions), control valve bodies, flow switches, 
pressure taps with valve, and wells for sensors. 

I. Thermometer Wells: In pipes 65 mm (2-1/2 inches) and smaller increase 
the pipe size to provide free area equal to the upstream pipe area. 

J. Firestopping: Fill openings around uninsulated piping penetrating 
floors or fire walls, with firestop material. For firestopping 
insulated piping refer to Section 23 07 11, HVAC,. 

K. Where copper piping is connected to steel piping, provide dielectric 
connections. 

3.2 PIPE JOINTS 

A. Welded: Beveling, spacing and other details shall conform to ASME B31.1 
and AWS B2.1. See Welder’s qualification requirements under "Quality 
Assurance" in Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 

B. Screwed: Threads shall conform to ASME B1.20; joint compound shall be 
applied to male threads only and joints made up so no more than three 
threads show. Coat exposed threads on steel pipe with joint compound, 
or red lead paint for corrosion protection. 

 


3.3 SEISMIC BRACING ABOVEGROUND PIPING 

 Provide in accordance with Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC RESTRAINT 

 REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS 

3.4 LEAK TESTING ABOVEGROUND PIPING 

A. Inspect all joints and connections for leaks and workmanship and make 
corrections as necessary, to the satisfaction of the Resident Engineer. 
Tests may be either of those below, or a combination, as approved by 
the Resident Engineer. 

B. An operating test at design pressure, and for hot systems, design 
maximum temperature. 

C. A hydrostatic test at 1.5 times design pressure. For water systems the 
design maximum pressure would usually be the static head, or expansion 
tank maximum pressure, plus pump head. Factory tested, coils, etc.) 
need not be field tested. Isolate equipment where necessary to avoid 
excessive pressure on mechanical seals and safety devices. 

3.5 FLUSHING AND CLEANING PIPING SYSTEMS 

A. Water Piping: Clean systems as recommended by the suppliers of 
chemicals. 

1. Initial flushing: Remove loose dirt, mill scale, metal chips, weld 
beads, rust, and like deleterious substances without damage to any 
system component. Provide temporary piping or hose to bypass coils, 
control valves, nd other factory cleaned equipment unless acceptable 
means of protection are provided and subsequent inspection of 
hide-out areas takes place. Isolate or protect clean system 
components, including pumps and pressure vessels, and remove any 
component which may be damaged. Open all valves, drains, vents and 
strainers at all system levels. Remove plugs, caps, spool pieces, 
and components to facilitate early debris discharge from system. 
Sectionalize system to obtain debris carrying velocity of 1.8 m/S (6 
feet per second), if possible. Connect dead-end supply and return 
headers as necessary. Flush bottoms of risers. Install temporary 
strainers where necessary to protect down-stream equipment. Supply 
and remove flushing water and drainage by various type hose, 
temporary and permanent piping and Contractor's booster pumps. Flush 
until clean as approved by the Resident Engineer. 

2. Cleaning: circulate systems at normal temperature to remove adherent 
organic soil, hydrocarbons, flux, pipe mill varnish, pipe joint 
compounds, iron oxide, and like deleterious substances not removed 


by flushing, without chemical or mechanical damage to any system 
component. Removal of tightly adherent mill scale is not required. 
Keep isolated equipment which is "clean" and where dead-end debris 
accumulation cannot occur. Sectionalize system if possible, to 
circulate at velocities not less than 1.8 m/S (6 feet per second). 
Circulate each section for not less than four hours. Blow-down all 
strainers, or remove and clean as frequently as necessary. Drain and 
prepare for final flushing. 

3. Final Flushing: Return systems to conditions required by initial 
flushing after all cleaning solution has been displaced by clean 
make-up. Flush all dead ends and isolated clean equipment. Gently 
operate all valves to dislodge any debris in valve body by 
throttling velocity. Flush for not less than one hour. 

3.6 OPERATING AND PERFORMANCE TEST AND INSTRUCTION 

A. Refer to PART 3, Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

B. Adjust red set hand on pressure gages to normal working pressure. 

- - - E N D - - - 

 


SECTION 23 31 00 
HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Ductwork and accessories for HVAC including the following: 

 1. Supply air, return air, and exhaust air. 

B. Definitions: 

1. SMACNA Standards as used in this specification means the HVAC Duct 
Construction Standards, Metal and Flexible. 

2. Seal or Sealing: Use of liquid or mastic sealant, with or without 
compatible tape overlay, or gasketing of flanged joints, to keep air 
leakage at duct joints, seams and connections to an acceptable 
minimum. 

3. Duct Pressure Classification: SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction 
Standards, Metal and Flexible. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Fire Stopping Material: Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

 B. Seismic Reinforcing: Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS 
FOR NON-STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS. 

C. General Mechanical Requirements: Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS 
FOR HVAC and STEAM GENERATION. 

D. Noise Level Requirements: Section 23 05 41, NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL 
FOR HVAC PIPING and EQUIPMENT. 

E. Duct Insulation: Section 23 07 11, HVAC INSULATION 

F. Plumbing Connections: Section 22 11 00, FACILITY WATER DISTRIBUTION 

G. Air Flow Control Valves and Terminal Units: Section 23 36 00, AIR 
TERMINAL UNITS. 

H Duct Mounted Coils: Section 23 82 16, AIR COILS. 

I. Testing and Balancing of Air Flows: Section 23 05 93, TESTING, 
ADJUSTING, and BALANCING FOR HVAC. 

J. Smoke Detectors: Section 28 31 00, FIRE DETECTION and ALARM. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Refer to article, QUALITY ASSURANCE, in Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK 
RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

B. Fire Safety Code: Comply with NFPA 90A. 

C. Duct System Construction and Installation: Referenced SMACNA Standards 
are the minimum acceptable quality. 


D. Duct Sealing, Air Leakage Criteria, and Air Leakage Tests: Ducts shall 
be sealed as per duct sealing requirements of SMACNA HVAC Air Duct 
Leakage Test Manual for duct pressure classes shown on the drawings. 

E. Duct accessories exposed to the air stream, such as dampers of all types 
(except smoke dampers) and access openings, shall be of the same 
material as the duct or provide at least the same level of corrosion 
resistance. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
and SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Rectangular ducts: 

a. Schedules of duct systems, materials and selected SMACNA 
construction alternatives for joints, sealing, gage and 
reinforcement. 

b. Duct liner. 

c. Sealants and gaskets. 

d. Access doors. 

2. Round construction details: 

a. Manufacturer's details for duct fittings. 

b. Duct liner. 

c. Sealants and gaskets. 

d. Access sections. 

e. Installation instructions. 

3. Volume dampers, back draft dampers. 

4. Upper hanger attachments. 

5. Fire dampers, fire doors, and smoke dampers with installation 
instructions. 

6. Flexible ducts and clamps, with manufacturer's installation 
instructions. 

7. Flexible connections. 

8. Instrument test fittings. 

9 COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

C. Coordination Drawings: Refer to article, SUBMITTALS, in Section 23 05 11 
– Common Work Results for HVAC and Steam Generation. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE): 


ASCE7-05................Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other 
Structures 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-99(2009)...........Standard Specification for Stainless and 
Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel Steel Plate, 
Sheet, and Strip 

A653-09.................Standard Specification for Steel Sheet, 
Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) or Zinc-Iron Alloy 
coated (Galvannealed) by the Hot-Dip process 

A1011-09a...............Standard Specification for Steel, Sheet and 
Strip, Hot rolled, Carbon, structural, High- 
Strength Low-Alloy, High Strength Low-Alloy with 
Improved Formability, and Ultra-High Strength 

B209-07.................Standard Specification for Aluminum and 
Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate 

C1071-05e1..............Standard Specification for Fibrous Glass Duct 
Lining Insulation (Thermal and Sound Absorbing 
Material) 

E84-09a.................Standard Test Method for Surface Burning 
Characteristics of Building Materials 

D. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

90A-09..................Standard for the Installation of Air 
Conditioning and Ventilating Systems 

96-08...................Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire 
Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations 

E. Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association 
(SMACNA): 

2nd Edition – 2005......HVAC Duct Construction Standards, Metal and 
Flexible 

1st Edition - 1985......HVAC Air Duct Leakage Test Manual 

6th Edition – 2003......Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards 

F. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

181-08..................Factory-Made Air Ducts and Air Connectors 

555-06 .................Standard for Fire Dampers 

555S-06 ................Standard for Smoke Dampers 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

 

2.1 DUCT MATERIALS AND SEALANTS 

A. General: Except for systems specified otherwise, construct ducts, 
casings, and accessories of galvanized sheet steel, ASTM A653, coating 
G90; or, aluminum sheet, ASTM B209, alloy 1100, 3003 or 5052. 


B. Specified Corrosion Resistant Systems: Stainless steel sheet, ASTM A167, 
Class 302 or 304, Condition A (annealed) Finish No. 4 for exposed ducts 
and Finish No. 2B for concealed duct or ducts located in mechanical 
rooms. 

C. Joint Sealing: Refer to SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards, 
paragraph S1.9. 

1. Sealant: Elastomeric compound, gun or brush grade, maximum 25 flame 
spread and 50 smoke developed (dry state) compounded specifically for 
sealing ductwork as recommended by the manufacturer. Generally 
provide liquid sealant, with or without compatible tape, for low 
clearance slip joints and heavy, permanently elastic, mastic type 
where clearances are larger. Oil base caulking and glazing compounds 
are not acceptable because they do not retain elasticity and bond. 

2. Tape: Use only tape specifically designated by the sealant 
manufacturer and apply only over wet sealant. Pressure sensitive tape 
shall not be used on bare metal or on dry sealant. 

3. Gaskets in Flanged Joints: Soft neoprene. 

D. Approved factory made joints may be used. 

2.2 DUCT CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION 

A. Regardless of the pressure classifications outlined in the SMACNA 
Standards, fabricate and seal the ductwork in accordance with the 
following pressure classifications: 

B. Duct Pressure Classification: 

 0 to 50 mm (2 inch) 

> 50 mm to 75 mm (2 inch to 3 inch) 

> 75 mm to 100 mm (3 inch to 4 inch) 

Show pressure classifications on the floor plans. 

C. Seal Class: All ductwork shall receive Class A Seal 

D. Round Ducts: Furnish duct and fittings made by the same manufacturer to 
insure good fit of slip joints. When submitted and approved in advance, 
round duct, with size converted on the basis of equal pressure drop, may 
be furnished in lieu of rectangular duct design shown on the drawings. 

1. Elbows: Diameters 80 through 200 mm (3 through 8 inches) shall be two 
sections die stamped, all others shall be gored construction, maximum 
18 degree angle, with all seams continuously welded or standing seam. 
Coat galvanized areas of fittings damaged by welding with corrosion 
resistant aluminum paint or galvanized repair compound. 

2. Provide bell mouth, conical tees or taps, laterals, reducers, and 
other low loss fittings as shown in SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction 
Standards. 


E. Volume Dampers: Single blade or opposed blade, multi-louver type as 
detailed in SMACNA Standards. Refer to SMACNA Detail Figure 2-12 for 
Single Blade and Figure 2.13 for Multi-blade Volume Dampers. 

F. Duct Hangers and Supports: Refer to SMACNA Standards Section IV. Avoid 
use of trapeze hangers for round duct. 

 

2.3 DUCT ACCESS DOORS, PANELS AND SECTIONS 

A. Provide access doors, sized and located for maintenance work, upstream, 
in the following locations: 

1. Each duct mounted coil and humidifier. 

2. Each fire damper (for link service), smoke damper and automatic 
control damper. 

3. Each duct mounted smoke detector. 

B. Openings shall be as large as feasible in small ducts, 300 mm by 300 mm 
(12 inch by 12 inch) minimum where possible. Access sections in 
insulated ducts shall be double-wall, insulated. Transparent 
shatterproof covers are preferred for uninsulated ducts. 

1. For rectangular ducts: Refer to SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction 
Standards (Figure 2-12). 

2. For round duct: Refer to SMACNA HVAC duct Construction Standards 
(Figure 2-11). 

2.4 FIRE DAMPERS 

A. Galvanized steel, interlocking blade type, UL listing and label, 1-1/2 
hour rating, 70 degrees C (160 degrees F) fusible line, 100 percent free 
opening with no part of the blade stack or damper frame in the air 
stream. 

B. Fire dampers in wet air exhaust shall be of stainless steel 
construction, all others may be galvanized steel. 

C. Minimum requirements for fire dampers: 

1. The damper frame may be of design and length as to function as the 
mounting sleeve, thus eliminating the need for a separate sleeve, as 
allowed by UL 555. Otherwise provide sleeves and mounting angles, 
minimum 1.9 mm (14 gage), required to provide installation equivalent 
to the damper manufacturer's UL test installation. 

2. Submit manufacturer's installation instructions conforming to UL 
rating test. 

2.5 FLEXIBLE AIR DUCT 

A. General: Factory fabricated, complying with NFPA 90A for connectors not 
passing through floors of buildings. Flexible ducts shall not penetrate 
any fire or smoke barrier which is required to have a fire resistance 
rating of one hour or more. Flexible duct length shall not exceed 1.5 m 


(5 feet). Provide insulated acoustical air duct connectors in supply air 
duct systems and elsewhere as shown. 

B. Flexible ducts shall be listed by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 
complying with UL 181. Ducts larger than 200 mm (8 inches) in diameter 
shall be Class 1. Ducts 200 mm (8 inches) in diameter and smaller may be 
Class 1 or Class 2. 

C. Insulated Flexible Air Duct: Factory made including mineral fiber 
insulation with maximum C factor of 0.25 at 24 degrees C (75 degrees F) 
mean temperature, encased with a low permeability moisture barrier outer 
jacket, having a puncture resistance of not less than 50 Beach Units. 
Acoustic insertion loss shall not be less than 3 dB per 300 mm (foot) of 
straight duct, at 500 Hz, based on 150 mm (6 inch) duct, of 750 m/min 
(2500 fpm). 

D. Application Criteria: 

1. Temperature range: -18 to 93 degrees C (0 to 200 degrees F) internal. 

2. Maximum working velocity: 1200 m/min (4000 feet per minute). 

3. Minimum working pressure, inches of water gage: 2500 Pa (10 inches) 
positive, 500 Pa (2 inches) negative. 

E. Duct Clamps: 100 percent nylon strap, 80 kg (175 pounds) minimum loop 
tensile strength manufactured for this purpose or stainless steel strap 
with cadmium plated worm gear tightening device. Apply clamps with 
sealant and as approved for UL 181, Class 1 installation. 

2.6 FLEXIBLE DUCT CONNECTIONS 

 Where duct connections are made to air terminal units, install a 
non-combustible flexible connection of 822 g (29 ounce) neoprene coated 
fiberglass fabric approximately 150 mm (6 inches) wide. Burning 
characteristics shall conform to NFPA 90A. Securely fasten flexible 
connections to round ducts with stainless steel or zinc-coated iron draw 
bands with worm gear fastener. For rectangular connections, crimp fabric 
to sheet metal and fasten sheet metal to ducts by screws 50 mm (2 
inches) on center. Fabric shall not be stressed other than by air 
pressure. Allow at least 25 mm (one inch) slack to ensure that no 
vibration is transmitted. 

2.7 FIRESTOPPING MATERIAL 

 Refer to Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

2.8 INSTRUMENT TEST FITTINGS 

A. Manufactured type with a minimum 50 mm (two inch) length for insulated 
duct, and a minimum 25 mm (one inch) length for duct not insulated. Test 
hole shall have a flat gasket for rectangular ducts and a concave gasket 
for round ducts at the base, and a screw cap to prevent air leakage. 


B. Provide instrument test holes at each duct or casing mounted temperature 
sensor or transmitter, and at entering and leaving side of each heating 
coil. 

2.9 AIR FLOW CONTROL VALVES (AFCV) 

 Refer to Section 23 36 00, AIR TERMINAL UNITS 

 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Comply with provisions of Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR 
HVAC, particularly regarding coordination with other trades and work in 
existing buildings. 

B. Fabricate and install ductwork and accessories in accordance with 
referenced SMACNA Standards: 

1. Drawings show the general layout of ductwork and accessories but do 
not show all required fittings and offsets that may be necessary to 
connect ducts to equipment, boxes, diffusers, grilles, etc., and to 
coordinate with other trades. Fabricate ductwork based on field 
measurements. Provide all necessary fittings and offsets at no 
additional cost to the government. Coordinate with other trades for 
space available and relative location of HVAC equipment and 
accessories on ceiling grid. Duct sizes on the drawings are inside 
dimensions which shall be altered by Contractor to other dimensions 
with the same air handling characteristics where necessary to avoid 
interferences and clearance difficulties. 

2. Provide duct transitions, offsets and connections to dampers, coils, 
and other equipment in accordance with SMACNA Standards, Section II. 
Provide streamliner, when an obstruction cannot be avoided and must 
be taken in by a duct. Repair galvanized areas with galvanizing 
repair compound. 

3. Provide bolted construction and tie-rod reinforcement in accordance 
with SMACNA Standards. 

4. Construct casings, eliminators, and pipe penetrations in accordance 
with SMACNA Standards, Chapter 6. Design casing access doors to swing 
against air pressure so that pressure helps to maintain a tight seal. 

C. Install duct hangers and supports in accordance with SMACNA Standards, 
Chapter 4. 

D. Install fire dampers, smoke dampers and combination fire/smoke dampers 
in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions to conform to the 
installation used for the rating test. Install fire dampers, smoke 
dampers and combination fire/smoke dampers at locations indicated and 
where ducts penetrate fire rated and/or smoke rated walls, shafts and 


where required by the Resident Engineer. Install with required 
perimeter mounting angles, sleeves, breakaway duct connections, 
corrosion resistant springs, bearings, bushings and hinges per UL and 
NFPA. Demonstrate re-setting of fire dampers and operation of smoke 
dampers to the Resident Engineer. 

E. Seal openings around duct penetrations of floors and fire rated 
partitions with fire stop material as required by NFPA 90A. 

F. Flexible duct installation: Refer to SMACNA Standards, Chapter 3. Ducts 
shall be continuous, single pieces not over 1.5 m (5 feet) long (NFPA 
90A), as straight and short as feasible, adequately supported. 
Centerline radius of bends shall be not less than two duct diameters. 
Make connections with clamps as recommended by SMACNA. Clamp per SMACNA 
with one clamp on the core duct and one on the insulation jacket. 
Flexible ducts shall not penetrate floors, or any chase or partition 
designated as a fire or smoke barrier, including corridor partitions 
fire rated one hour or two hour. Support ducts SMACNA Standards. 

G. Where diffusers, registers and grilles cannot be installed to avoid 
seeing inside the duct, paint the inside of the duct with flat black 
paint to reduce visibility. 

H. Control Damper Installation: 

1. Provide necessary blank-off plates required to install dampers that 
are smaller than duct size. Provide necessary transitions required to 
install dampers larger than duct size. 

2. Assemble multiple sections dampers with required interconnecting 
linkage and extend required number of shafts through duct for 
external mounting of damper motors. 

3. Provide necessary sheet metal baffle plates to eliminate 
stratification and provide air volumes specified. Locate baffles by 
experimentation, and affix and seal permanently in place, only after 
stratification problem has been eliminated. 

4. Install all damper control/adjustment devices on stand-offs to allow 
complete coverage of insulation. 

I. Air Flow Measuring Devices (AFMD): Install units with minimum straight 
run distances, upstream and downstream as recommended by the 
manufacturer. 

J. Low Pressure Duct Liner: Install in accordance with SMACNA, Duct Liner 
Application Standard. 

K. Protection and Cleaning: Adequately protect equipment and materials 
against physical damage. Place equipment in first class operating 
condition, or return to source of supply for repair or replacement, as 
determined by Resident Engineer. Protect equipment and ducts during 


construction against entry of foreign matter to the inside and clean 
both inside and outside before operation and painting. When new ducts 
are connected to existing ductwork, clean both new and existing ductwork 
by mopping and vacuum cleaning inside and outside before operation. 

3.2 DUCT LEAKAGE TESTS AND REPAIR 

A. Ductwork leakage testing shall be performed by the Testing and Balancing 
Contractor directly contracted by the General Contractor and independent 
of the Sheet Metal Contractor. 

B. Ductwork leakage testing shall be performed for the scope of work of the 
air distribution system (including all supply, return, and exhaust), 
section by section, including the air termina units and coils. 

C. Test procedure, apparatus and report shall conform to SMACNA Leakage 
Test manual. The maximum leakage rate allowed is 4 percent of the design 
air flow rate. 

D. All ductwork shall be leak tested first before enclosed in a shaft or 
covered in other inaccessible areas. 

E. All tests shall be performed in the presence of the Resident Engineer 
and the Test and Balance agency. The Test and Balance agency shall 
measure and record duct leakage and report to the Resident Engineer and 
identify leakage source with excessive leakage. 

F. If any portion of the duct system tested fails to meet the permissible 
leakage level, the Contractor shall rectify sealing of ductwork to bring 
it into compliance and shall retest it until acceptable leakage is 
demonstrated to the Resident Engineer. 

G. All tests and necessary repairs shall be completed prior to insulation 
or concealment of ductwork. 

H. Make sure all openings used for testing flow and temperatures by TAB 
Contractor are sealed properly. 

 

 

3.3 TESTING, ADJUSTING AND BALANCING (TAB) 

 Refer to Section 23 05 93, TESTING, ADJUSTING, and BALANCING FOR HVAC. 

3.4 OPERATING AND PERFORMANCE TESTS 

 Refer to Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 23 36 00 
AIR TERMINAL UNITS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Air terminal units, air flow control valves. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STRUCTURAL 
COMPONENTS: Seismic restraints for equipment. 

B. Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC: General mechanical 
requirements and items, which are common to more than one section of 
Division 23. 

C. Section 23 05 41, NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL FOR HVAC PIPING AND 
EQUIPMENT: Noise requirements. 

D. Section 23 31 00, HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS: Ducts and flexible 
connectors. 

E. Section 23 05 93, TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC: Flow 
rates adjusting and balancing. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

 Refer to Paragraph, QUALITY ASSURANCE, in Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK 
RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT 
DATA, and SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

1. Air Terminal Units: Submit test data. 

2. Air flow control valves. 

C. Certificates: 

1. Compliance with paragraph, QUALITY ASSURANCE. 

2. Compliance with specified standards. 

D. Operation and Maintenance Manuals: Submit in accordance with paragraph, 
INSTRUCTIONS, in Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 


B. Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute (AHRI)/(ARI): 

880-08..................Air Terminals Addendum to ARI 888-98 
incorporated into standard posted 15th December 
2002 

C. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

90A-09..................Standard for the Installation of Air 
Conditioning and Ventilating Systems 

D. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

181-08..................Standard for Factory-Made Air Ducts and Air 
Connectors 

E. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

C 665-06................Standard Specification for Mineral-Fiber 
Blanket Thermal Insulation for Light Frame 
Construction and Manufactured Housing 

1.6 GUARANTY 

 In accordance with the GENERAL CONDITIONS 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

 

2.1 GENERAL 

A. Coils: 

 1. Water Heating Coils: 

a. ARI certified, continuous plate or spiral fin type, leak 
tested at 2070 kPa (300 PSI). 

b. Capacity: As indicated, based on scheduled entering water 
temperature. 

c. Headers: Copper or Brass. 

d. Fins: Aluminum, maximum 315 fins per meter (8 fins per inch). 

e. Tubes: Copper, arrange for counter-flow of heating water. 

f. Water Flow Rate: Minimum 0.032 Liters/second (0.5 GPM). 

g. Provide vent and drain connection at high and low point, 
respectively of each coil. 

h. Coils shall be guaranteed to drain. 

B. Labeling: Control box shall be clearly marked with an identification 
label that lists such information as nominal CFM, maximum and minimum 
factory-set airflow limits, coil type and coil connection orientation, 
where applicable. 


C. Factory calibrate air terminal units to air flow rate indicated. All 
settings including maximum and minimum air flow shall be field 
adjustable. 

D. Dampers with internal air volume control: See section 23 31 00 HVAC 
DUCTS and CASINGS. 

E. Terminal Sound Attenuators: See Section 23 31 00 (HVAC DUCTS AND 
CASINGS). 

2.2 AIR TERMINAL UNITS (BOXES) 

A. General: Factory built, pressure independent units, factory set-field 
adjustable air flow rate, suitable for single duct applications. Use 
of dual-duct air terminal units is not permitted. Clearly show on each 
unit the unit number and factory set air volumes corresponding to the 
contract drawings. Section 23 05 93, TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING 
FOR HVAC work assumes factory set air volumes. All air terminal units 
shall be brand new products of the same manufacturer. 

B. Capacity and Performance: The Maximum Capacity of a single terminal 
unit shall not exceed 566 Liters/second (1,200 CFM). 

C. Sound Power Levels: 

Acoustic performance of the air terminal units shall be based on the 
design noise levels for the spaces stipulated in Section 23 05 41 
(Noise and Vibration Control for HVAC Piping and Equipment). Equipment 
schedule (…) shall show the sound power levels in all octave bands. 
Terminal sound attenuators shall be provided, as required, to meet the 
intent of the design. 

D. Casing: Unit casing shall be constructed of galvanized steel no lighter 
than 0.85 mm (22 Gauge). Provide hanger brackets for attachment of 
supports. 

1. Lining material: Suitable to provide required acoustic performance, 
thermal insulation and prevent sweating. Meet the requirements of 
NFPA 90A and comply with UL 181 for erosion as well as ASTMC 665 
antimicrobial requirements. Insulation shall consist of 13 mm (1/2 
IN) thick non-porous foil faced rigid fiberglass insulation of 4- 
lb/cu.ft, secured by full length galvanized steel z-strips which 
enclose and seal all edges. Tape and adhesives shall not be used. 
Materials shall be non-friable and with surfaces, including all 
edges, fully encapsulated and faced with perforated metal or coated 
so that the air stream will not detach material. 


2. Access panels (or doors): Provide panels large enough for 
inspection, adjustment and maintenance without disconnecting ducts, 
and for cleaning heating coils attached to unit, even if there are 
no moving parts. Panels shall be insulated to same standards as the 
rest of the casing and shall be secured and gasketed airtight. It 
shall require no tool other than a screwdriver to remove. 

3. Total leakage from casing: Not to exceed 2 percent of the nominal 
capacity of the unit when subjected to a static pressure of 750 Pa 
(3 inch WG), with all outlets sealed shut and inlets fully open. 

4. Octopus connector: Factory installed, lined air distribution 
terminal. Provide where flexible duct connections are shown on the 
drawings connected directly to terminals. Provide butterflybalancing 
damper, with locking means in connectors with more than 
one outlet. 

E. Construct dampers and other internal devices of corrosion resisting 
materials which do not require lubrication or other periodic 
maintenance. 

1. Damper Leakage: Not greater than 2 percent of maximum rated 
capacity, when closed against inlet static pressure of 1 kPa (4 inch 
WG). 

F. Provide multi-point velocity pressure sensors with external pressure 
taps. 

1. Provide direct reading air flow rate table pasted to box. 

G. Provide static pressure tubes. 

H. Externally powered DDC variable air volume controller and damper 
actuator to be furnished for factory mounting on air terminal units. 
The DDC controller shall be electrically actuated. DDC controls will 
be provided by the BAS contractor and shall be compatible with the 
existing system. 

 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Work shall be installed as shown and according to the manufacturer’s 
diagrams and recommendations. 

B. Handle and install units in accordance with manufacturer's written 
instructions. 

C. Support units rigidly so they remain stationary at all times. 
Cross-bracing or other means of stiffening shall be provided as 


necessary. Method of support shall be such that distortion and 
malfunction of units cannot occur. 

D. Locate air terminal units to provide a straight section of inlet duct 
for proper functioning of volume controls. See VA Standard Detail. 

3.2 OPERATIONAL TEST 

 Refer to Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 23 37 00 
AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. Air Outlets and Inlets: Diffusers, Registers, and Grilles. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Seismic Reinforcing: Section 13 05 41, SEISMIC RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS 
FOR NON-STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS. 

B. General Mechanical Requirements: Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS 
FOR HVAC. 

C. Noise Level Requirements: Section 23 05 41, NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL 
FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT. 

D. Testing and Balancing of Air Flows: Section 23 05 93, TESTING, 
ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Refer to article, QUALITY ASSURANCE, in Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK 
RESULTS FOR HVAC. 

B. Fire Safety Code: Comply with NFPA 90A. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
and SAMPLES. 

B. Manufacturer's Literature and Data: 

2. Diffusers, registers, grilles and accessories. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. Air Diffusion Council Test Code: 

1062 GRD-84.............Certification, Rating, and Test Manual 4th 
Edition 

C. American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE): 

ASCE7-05................Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other 
Structures 

D. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A167-99 (2004)..........Standard Specification for Stainless and 
Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel Steel Plate, 
Sheet and Strip 

B209-07.................Standard Specification for Aluminum and 
Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate 


E. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

90A-09..................Standard for the Installation of Air 
Conditioning and Ventilating Systems 

F. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

181-08..................UL Standard for Safety Factory-Made Air Ducts 
and Connectors 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 

A. Materials: 

1. Steel or aluminum Use aluminum air outlets and inlets for facilities 
located in high-humidity areas. Exhaust air registers located in 
combination toilets and shower stalls shall be constructed from 
aluminum.. Provide manufacturer's standard gasket. 

2. Exposed Fastenings: The same material as the respective inlet or 
outlet. Fasteners for aluminum may be stainless steel. 

3. Contractor shall review all ceiling drawings and details and provide 
all ceiling mounted devices with appropriate dimensions and trim for 
the specific locations. 

B. Performance Test Data: In accordance with Air Diffusion Council Code 
1062GRD. Refer to Section 23 05 41, NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL FOR HVAC 
PIPING AND EQUIPMENT for NC criteria. 

C. Air Supply Outlets: 

1. Ceiling Diffusers: Suitable for surface mounting, exposed T-bar or 
special tile ceilings, off-white finish, square or round neck 
connection as shown on the drawings. Provide plaster frame for units 
in plaster ceilings. 

a. Square, louver, fully adjustable pattern: Round neck, surface 
mounting unless shown otherwise on the drawings. Provide 
equalizing or control grid and volume control damper. 

b. Louver face type: Square or rectangular, removable core for 1, 2, 
3, or 4 way directional pattern. Provide equalizing or control 
grid and opposed blade damper. 

c. Perforated face type: Manual adjustment for one-, two-, three-, or 
four-way horizontal air distribution pattern without change of air 
volume or pressure. Provide equalizing or control grid and opposed 
blade over overlapping blade damper. Perforated face diffusers for 
VAV systems shall have the pattern controller on the inner face, 
rather than in the neck and designed to discharge air horizontally 
at the ceiling maintaining a Coanda effect. 

 


d. Slot diffuser/plenum: 

1) Diffuser: Frame and support bars shall be constructed of heavy 
gauge extruded aluminum. Form slots or use adjustable pattern 
controllers, to provide stable, horizontal air flow pattern 
over a wide range of operating conditions. 

2) Galvanized steel boot lined with 13 mm (1/2 inch) thick 
fiberglass conforming to NFPA 90A and complying with UL 181 for 
erosion. The internal lining shall be factory-fabricated, antimicrobial, 
and non-friable. 

3) Provide inlet connection diameter equal to duct diameter shown 
on drawings or provide transition coupling if necessary. Inlet 
duct and plenum size shall be as recommended by the 
manufacturer. 

4) Maximum pressure drop at design flow rate: 37 Pa 

 (0.15 inch W.G.) 

2. Supply Registers: Double deflection type with horizontal face bars 
and opposed blade damper with removable key operator. 

a. Margin: Flat, 30 mm (1-1/4 inches) wide. 

b. Bar spacing: 20 mm (3/4 inch) maximum. 

c. Finish: Off white baked enamel for ceiling mounted units. Wall 
units shall have a prime coat for field painting, or shall be 
extruded with manufacturer's standard finish. 

D. Return and Exhaust Registers and Grilles: Provide opposed blade damper 
without removable key operator for registers. 

1. Finish: Off-white baked enamel for ceiling mounted units. Wall units 
shall have a prime coat for field painting, or shall be extruded 
aluminum with manufacturer's standard aluminum finish. 

2. Standard Type: Fixed horizontal face bars set at 30 to 45 degrees, 
approximately 30 mm (1-1/4 inch) margin. 

3. Perforated Face Type: To match supply units. 

4. Grid Core Type: 13 mm by 13 mm (1/2 inch by 1/2 inch) core with 30 mm 
(1-1/4 inch) margin. 

5. Linear Type: To match supply units. 

6. Door Grilles: Are furnished with the doors. 

7. Egg Crate Grilles: Aluminum or Painted Steel 1/2 by 1/2 by 1/2 inch 
grid providing 90% free area. 

a. Heavy extruded aluminum frame shall have countersunk screw 
mounting. Unless otherwise indicated, register blades and frame 
shall have factory applied white finish. 


b. Grille shall be suitable for duct or surface mounting as indicated 
on drawings. All necessary appurtenances shall be provided to 
allow for mounting. 

 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Comply with provisions of Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR 
HVAC, particularly regarding coordination with other trades and work in 
existing buildings. 

B. Protection and Cleaning: Protect equipment and materials against 
physical damage. Place equipment in first class operating condition, or 
return to source of supply for repair or replacement, as determined by 
Resident Engineer. Protect equipment during construction against entry 
of foreign matter to the inside and clean both inside and outside before 
operation and painting. 

 

3.2 TESTING, ADJUSTING AND BALANCING (TAB) 

Refer to Section 23 05 93, TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC. 

3.3 OPERATING AND PERFORMANCE TESTS 

Refer to Section 23 05 11, COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 26 05 11 

REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section applies to all sections of Division 26. 

B. Furnish and install electrical systems, materials, equipment, and 
accessories in accordance with the specifications and drawings. 
Capacities and ratings of motors, transformers, conductors and cable, 
switchboards, switchgear, panelboards, motor control centers, 
generators, automatic transfer switches, and other items and 
arrangements for the specified items are shown on the drawings. 

C. Electrical service entrance equipment and arrangements for temporary 
and permanent connections to the electric utility company’s system 
shall conform to the electric utility company's requirements. 
Coordinate fuses, circuit breakers and relays with the electric utility 
company’s system, and obtain electric utility company approval for 
sizes and settings of these devices. 

D. Conductor ampacities specified or shown on the drawings are based on 
copper conductors, with the conduit and raceways sized per NEC. 
Aluminum conductors are prohibited. 

1.2 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 

A. The International Building Code (IBC), National Electrical Code (NEC), 
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL), and National Fire Protection 
Association (NFPA) codes and standards are the minimum requirements for 
materials and installation. 

B. The drawings and specifications shall govern in those instances where 
requirements are greater than those stated in the above codes and 
standards. 

1.3 TEST STANDARDS 

A. All materials and equipment shall be listed, labeled, or certified by a 
Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) to meet Underwriters 
Laboratories, Inc. (UL), standards where test standards have been 
established. Materials and equipment which are not covered by UL 
standards will be accepted, providing that materials and equipment are 
listed, labeled, certified or otherwise determined to meet the safety 
requirements of a NRTL. Materials and equipment which no NRTL accepts, 
certifies, lists, labels, or determines to be safe, will be considered 


if inspected or tested in accordance with national industrial 
standards, such as ANSI, NEMA, and NETA. Evidence of compliance shall 
include certified test reports and definitive shop drawings. 

B. Definitions: 

1. Listed: Materials and equipment included in a list published by an 
organization that is acceptable to the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
and concerned with evaluation of products or services, that 
maintains periodic inspection of production or listed materials and 
equipment or periodic evaluation of services, and whose listing 
states that the materials and equipment either meets appropriate 
designated standards or has been tested and found suitable for a 
specified purpose. 

2. Labeled: Materials and equipment to which has been attached a label, 
symbol, or other identifying mark of an organization that is 
acceptable to the Authority Having Jurisdiction and concerned with 
product evaluation, that maintains periodic inspection of production 
of labeled materials and equipment, and by whose labeling the 
manufacturer indicates compliance with appropriate standards or 
performance in a specified manner. 

3. Certified: Materials and equipment which: 

a. Have been tested and found by a NRTL to meet nationally 
recognized standards or to be safe for use in a specified manner. 

b. Are periodically inspected by a NRTL. 

c. Bear a label, tag, or other record of certification. 

4. Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory: Testing laboratory which 
is recognized and approved by the Secretary of Labor in accordance 
with OSHA regulations. 

1.4 QUALIFICATIONS (PRODUCTS AND SERVICES) 

A. Manufacturer’s Qualifications: The manufacturer shall regularly and 
currently produce, as one of the manufacturer's principal products, the 
materials and equipment specified for this project, and shall have 
manufactured the materials and equipment for at least three years. 

B. Product Qualification: 

1. Manufacturer's materials and equipment shall have been in 
satisfactory operation, on three installations of similar size and 
type as this project, for at least three years. 


2. The Government reserves the right to require the Contractor to 
submit a list of installations where the materials and equipment 
have been in operation before approval. 

SPEC WRITER NOTE: In the following 
paragraph use 4 hours for metropolitan 
areas and 8 hours for rural areas. 

 

C. Service Qualifications: There shall be a permanent service organization 
maintained or trained by the manufacturer which will render 
satisfactory service to this installation within four hours of receipt 
of notification that service is needed. Submit name and address of 
service organizations. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Applicable publications listed in all Sections of Division 26 are the 
latest issue, unless otherwise noted. 

B. Products specified in all sections of Division 26 shall comply with the 
applicable publications listed in each section. 

1.6 MANUFACTURED PRODUCTS 

A. Materials and equipment furnished shall be of current production by 
manufacturers regularly engaged in the manufacture of such items, and 
for which replacement parts shall be available. 

B. When more than one unit of the same class or type of materials and 
equipment is required, such units shall be the product of a single 
manufacturer. 

C. Equipment Assemblies and Components: 

1. Components of an assembled unit need not be products of the same 
manufacturer. 

2. Manufacturers of equipment assemblies, which include components made 
by others, shall assume complete responsibility for the final 
assembled unit. 

3. Components shall be compatible with each other and with the total 
assembly for the intended service. 

4. Constituent parts which are similar shall be the product of a single 
manufacturer. 

D. Factory wiring and terminals shall be identified on the equipment being 
furnished and on all wiring diagrams. 

E. When Factory Testing Is Specified: 

1. The Government shall have the option of witnessing factory tests. 
The Contractor shall notify the Government through the COTR a 


minimum of 15 working days prior to the manufacturer’s performing 
the factory tests. 

2. Four copies of certified test reports shall be furnished to the COTR 
two weeks prior to final inspection and not more than 90 days after 
completion of the tests. 

3. When materials and equipment fail factory tests, and re-testing and 
re-inspection is required, the Contractor shall be liable for all 
additional expenses for the Government to witness re-testing. 

1.7 VARIATIONS FROM CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS 

A. Where the Government or the Contractor requests variations from the 
contract requirements, the connecting work and related components shall 
include, but not be limited to additions or changes to branch circuits, 
circuit protective devices, conduits, wire, feeders, controls, panels 
and installation methods. 

1.8 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT PROTECTION 

A. Materials and equipment shall be protected during shipment and storage 
against physical damage, vermin, dirt, corrosive substances, fumes, 
moisture, cold and rain. 

1. Store materials and equipment indoors in clean dry space with 
uniform temperature to prevent condensation. 

2. During installation, equipment shall be protected against entry of 
foreign matter, and be vacuum-cleaned both inside and outside before 
testing and operating. Compressed air shall not be used to clean 
equipment. Remove loose packing and flammable materials from inside 
equipment. 

3. Damaged equipment shall be repaired or replaced, as determined by 
the COTR. 

4. Painted surfaces shall be protected with factory installed removable 
heavy kraft paper, sheet vinyl or equal. 

5. Damaged paint on equipment shall be refinished with the same quality 
of paint and workmanship as used by the manufacturer so repaired 
areas are not obvious. 

1.9 WORK PERFORMANCE 

A. All electrical work shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 70 
(NEC), NFPA 70B, NFPA 70E, OSHA Part 1910 subpart J – General 
Environmental Controls, OSHA Part 1910 subpart K – Medical and First 
Aid, and OSHA Part 1910 subpart S – Electrical, in addition to other 
references required by contract. 


B. Job site safety and worker safety is the responsibility of the 
Contractor. 

C. Electrical work shall be accomplished with all affected circuits or 
equipment de-energized. When an electrical outage cannot be 
accomplished in this manner for the required work, the following 
requirements are mandatory: 

1. Electricians must use full protective equipment (i.e., certified and 
tested insulating material to cover exposed energized electrical 
components, certified and tested insulated tools, etc.) while 
working on energized systems in accordance with NFPA 70E. 

2. Before initiating any work, a job specific work plan must be 
developed by the Contractor with a peer review conducted and 
documented by the COTR and Medical Center staff. The work plan must 
include procedures to be used on and near the live electrical 
equipment, barriers to be installed, safety equipment to be used, 
and exit pathways. 

3. Work on energized circuits or equipment cannot begin until prior 
written approval is obtained from the COTR. 

D. For work that affects existing electrical systems, arrange, phase and 
perform work to assure minimal interference with normal functioning of 
the facility. Refer to Article OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS under 
Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

E. New work shall be installed and connected to existing work neatly, 
safely and professionally. Disturbed or damaged work shall be replaced 
or repaired to its prior conditions, as required by Section 01 00 00, 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

F. Coordinate location of equipment and conduit with other trades to 
minimize interference. 

1.10 EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION AND REQUIREMENTS 

A. Equipment location shall be as close as practical to locations shown on 
the drawings. 

B. Working clearances shall not be less than specified in the NEC. 

C. Inaccessible Equipment: 

1. Where the Government determines that the Contractor has installed 
equipment not readily accessible for operation and maintenance, the 
equipment shall be removed and reinstalled as directed at no 
additional cost to the Government. 


2. "Readily accessible” is defined as being capable of being reached 
quickly for operation, maintenance, or inspections without the use 
of ladders, or without climbing or crawling under or over obstacles 
such as, but not limited to, motors, pumps, belt guards, 
transformers, piping, ductwork, conduit and raceways. 

D. Electrical service entrance equipment and arrangements for temporary 
and permanent connections to the electric utility company’s system 
shall conform to the electric utility company's requirements. 
Coordinate fuses, circuit breakers and relays with the electric utility 
company’s system, and obtain electric utility company approval for 
sizes and settings of these devices. 

1.11 EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 

A. In addition to the requirements of the NEC, install an identification 
sign which clearly indicates information required for use and 
maintenance of items such as switchboards and switchgear, panelboards, 
cabinets, motor controllers, fused and non-fused safety switches, 
generators, automatic transfer switches, separately enclosed circuit 
breakers, individual breakers and controllers in switchboards, 
switchgear and motor control assemblies, control devices and other 
significant equipment. 

B. Identification signs for Normal Power System equipment shall be 
laminated black phenolic resin with a white core with engraved 
lettering. Identification signs for Essential Electrical System (EES) 
equipment, as defined in the NEC, shall be laminated red phenolic resin 
with a white core with engraved lettering. Lettering shall be a minimum 
of 12 mm (1/2 inch) high. Identification signs shall indicate equipment 
designation, rated bus amperage, voltage, number of phases, number of 
wires, and type of EES power branch as applicable. Secure nameplates 
with screws. 

C. Install adhesive arc flash warning labels on all equipment as required 
by NFPA 70E. Label shall indicate the arc hazard boundary (inches), 
working distance (inches), arc flash incident energy at the working 
distance (calories/cm2), required PPE category and description 
including the glove rating, voltage rating of the equipment, limited 
approach distance (inches), restricted approach distance (inches), 
prohibited approach distance (inches), equipment/bus name, date 
prepared, and manufacturer name and address. 


1.12 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit to the COTR in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, 
PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

B. The Government's approval shall be obtained for all materials and 
equipment before delivery to the job site. Delivery, storage or 
installation of materials and equipment which has not had prior 
approval will not be permitted. 

C. All submittals shall include six copies of adequate descriptive 
literature, catalog cuts, shop drawings, test reports, certifications, 
samples, and other data necessary for the Government to ascertain that 
the proposed materials and equipment comply with drawing and 
specification requirements. Catalog cuts submitted for approval shall 
be legible and clearly identify specific materials and equipment being 
submitted. 

D. Submittals for individual systems and equipment assemblies which 
consist of more than one item or component shall be made for the system 
or assembly as a whole. Partial submittals will not be considered for 
approval. 

1. Mark the submittals, "SUBMITTED UNDER SECTION__________________". 

2. Submittals shall be marked to show specification reference including 
the section and paragraph numbers. 

3. Submit each section separately. 

E. The submittals shall include the following: 

1. Information that confirms compliance with contract requirements. 
Include the manufacturer's name, model or catalog numbers, catalog 
information, technical data sheets, shop drawings, manuals, 
pictures, nameplate data, and test reports as required. 

2. Elementary and interconnection wiring diagrams for communication and 
signal systems, control systems, and equipment assemblies. All 
terminal points and wiring shall be identified on wiring diagrams. 

3. Parts list which shall include information for replacement parts and 
ordering instructions, as recommended by the equipment manufacturer. 

F. Maintenance and Operation Manuals: 

1. Submit as required for systems and equipment specified in the 
technical sections. Furnish in hardcover binders or an approved 
equivalent. 

2. Inscribe the following identification on the cover: the words 
"MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION MANUAL," the name and location of the 


system, material, equipment, building, name of Contractor, and 
contract name and number. Include in the manual the names, 
addresses, and telephone numbers of each subcontractor installing 
the system or equipment and the local representatives for the 
material or equipment. 

3. Provide a table of contents and assemble the manual to conform to 
the table of contents, with tab sheets placed before instructions 
covering the subject. The instructions shall be legible and easily 
read, with large sheets of drawings folded in. 

4. The manuals shall include: 

a. Internal and interconnecting wiring and control diagrams with 
data to explain detailed operation and control of the equipment. 

b. A control sequence describing start-up, operation, and shutdown. 

c. Description of the function of each principal item of equipment. 

d. Installation instructions. 

e. Safety precautions for operation and maintenance. 

f. Diagrams and illustrations. 

g. Periodic maintenance and testing procedures and frequencies, 
including replacement parts numbers. 

h. Performance data. 

i. Pictorial "exploded" parts list with part numbers. Emphasis shall 
be placed on the use of special tools and instruments. The list 
shall indicate sources of supply, recommended spare and 
replacement parts, and name of servicing organization. 

j. List of factory approved or qualified permanent servicing 
organizations for equipment repair and periodic testing and 
maintenance, including addresses and factory certification 
qualifications. 

G. Approvals will be based on complete submission of shop drawings, 
manuals, test reports, certifications, and samples as applicable. 

H. After approval and prior to installation, furnish the COTR with one 
sample of each of the following: 

1. A minimum 300 mm (12 inches) length of each type and size of wire 
and cable along with the tag from the coils or reels from which the 
sample was taken. The length of the sample shall be sufficient to 
show all markings provided by the manufacturer. 

2. Each type of conduit coupling, bushing, and termination fitting. 

3. Conduit hangers, clamps, and supports. 


4. Duct sealing compound. 

5. Each type of receptacle, toggle switch, lighting control sensor, 
outlet box, manual motor starter, device wall plate, engraved 
nameplate, wire and cable splicing and terminating material, and 
branch circuit single pole molded case circuit breaker. 

1.13 SINGULAR NUMBER 

A. Where any device or part of equipment is referred to in these 
specifications in the singular number (e.g., "the switch"), this 
reference shall be deemed to apply to as many such devices as are 
required to complete the installation as shown on the drawings. 

1.14 ACCEPTANCE CHECKS AND TESTS 

A. The Contractor shall furnish the instruments, materials, and labor for 
tests. 

B. Where systems are comprised of components specified in more than one 
section of Division 26, the Contractor shall coordinate the 
installation, testing, and adjustment of all components between various 
manufacturer’s representatives and technicians so that a complete, 
functional, and operational system is delivered to the Government. 

C. When test results indicate any defects, the Contractor shall repair or 
replace the defective materials or equipment, and repeat the tests. 
Repair, replacement, and retesting shall be accomplished at no 
additional cost to the Government. 

1.15 WARRANTY 

A. All work performed and all equipment and material furnished under this 
Division shall be free from defects and shall remain so for a period of 
one year from the date of acceptance of the entire installation by the 
Contracting Officer for the Government. 

1.16 INSTRUCTION 

A. Instruction to designated Government personnel shall be provided for 
the particular equipment or system as required in each associated 
technical specification section. 

B. Furnish the services of competent instructors to give full instruction 
in the adjustment, operation, and maintenance of the specified 
equipment and system, including pertinent safety requirements. 
Instructors shall be thoroughly familiar with all aspects of the 
installation, and shall be trained in operating theory as well as 
practical operation and maintenance procedures. 


C. A training schedule shall be developed and submitted by the Contractor 
and approved by the COTR at least 30 days prior to the planned 
training. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) 

PART 3 - EXECUTION (NOT USED) 

---END--- 


SECTION 26 05 19 

LOW-VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLES 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies the furnishing, installation, connection, and 
testing of the electrical conductors and cables for use in electrical 
systems rated 600 V and below, indicated as cable(s), conductor(s), 
wire, or wiring in this section. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING: Sealing around penetrations to maintain 
the integrity of fire-resistant rated construction. 

B. Section 26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS: 
Requirements that apply to all sections of Division 26. 

C. Section 26 05 26, GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS: 
Requirements for personnel safety and to provide a low impedance path 
for possible ground fault currents. 

D. Section 26 05 33, RACEWAY AND BOXES FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS: Conduits 
for conductors and cables. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Refer to Paragraph, QUALIFICATIONS (PRODUCTS AND SERVICES), in Section 
26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1.4 FACTORY TESTS 

A. Conductors and cables shall be thoroughly tested at the factory per 
NEMA to ensure that there are no electrical defects. Factory tests 
shall be certified. 

1.5 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit six copies of the following in accordance with Section 26 05 11, 
REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1. Shop Drawings: 

a. Submit sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with 
drawings and specifications. 

b. Submit the following data for approval: 

1) Electrical ratings and insulation type for each conductor and 
cable. 

2) Splicing materials and pulling lubricant. 

2. Certifications: Two weeks prior to final inspection, submit the 
following. 


a. Certification by the manufacturer that the conductors and cables 
conform to the requirements of the drawings and specifications. 

b. Certification by the Contractor that the conductors and cables 
have been properly installed, adjusted, and tested. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below (including amendments, addenda, revisions, 
supplements and errata) form a part of this specification to the extent 
referenced. Publications are reference in the text by designation only. 

B. American Society of Testing Material (ASTM): 

D2301-10................Standard Specification for Vinyl Chloride 
Plastic Pressure-Sensitive Electrical 
Insulating Tape 

D2304-10................Test Method for Thermal Endurance of Rigid 
Electrical Insulating Materials 

D3005-10................Low-Temperature Resistant Vinyl Chloride 
Plastic Pressure-Sensitive Electrical 
Insulating Tape 

C. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA): 

WC 70-09................Power Cables Rated 2000 Volts or Less for the 
Distribution of Electrical Energy 

D. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

70-11...................National Electrical Code (NEC) 

E. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

44-10...................Thermoset-Insulated Wires and Cables 

83-08...................Thermoplastic-Insulated Wires and Cables 

467-07..................Grounding and Bonding Equipment 

486A-486B-03............Wire Connectors 

486C-04.................Splicing Wire Connectors 

486D-05.................Sealed Wire Connector Systems 

486E-09.................Equipment Wiring Terminals for Use with 
Aluminum and/or Copper Conductors 

493-07..................Thermoplastic-Insulated Underground Feeder and 
Branch Circuit Cables 

514B-04.................Conduit, Tubing, and Cable Fittings 

 

 


PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 CONDUCTORS AND CABLES 

A. Conductors and cables shall be in accordance with NEMA, UL, as 
specified herein, and as shown on the drawings. 

B. All conductors shall be copper. 

C. Single Conductor and Cable: 

1. No. 12 AWG: Minimum size, except where smaller sizes are specified 
herein or shown on the drawings. 

2. No. 8 AWG and larger: Stranded. 

3. No. 10 AWG and smaller: Solid; except shall be stranded for final 
connection to motors, transformers, and vibrating equipment. 

4. Insulation: THHN-THWN and XHHW-2. XHHW-2 shall be used for isolated 
power systems. 

 

2.2 SPLICES 

A. Splices shall be in accordance with NEC and UL. 

B. Above Ground Splices for No. 10 AWG and Smaller: 

1. Solderless, screw-on, reusable pressure cable type, with integral 
insulation, approved for copper and aluminum conductors. 

2. The integral insulator shall have a skirt to completely cover the 
stripped conductors. 

3. The number, size, and combination of conductors used with the 
connector, as listed on the manufacturer's packaging, shall be 
strictly followed. 

C. Above Ground Splices for No. 8 AWG to No. 4/0 AWG: 

1. Compression, hex screw, or bolt clamp-type of high conductivity and 
corrosion-resistant material, listed for use with copper and 
aluminum conductors. 

2. Insulate with materials approved for the particular use, location, 
voltage, and temperature. Insulation level shall be not less than 
the insulation level of the conductors being joined. 

3. Splice and insulation shall be product of the same manufacturer. 

4. All bolts, nuts, and washers used with splices shall be cadmiumplated 
steel. 

D. Above Ground Splices for 250 kcmil and Larger: 

1. Long barrel “butt-splice” or “sleeve” type compression connectors, 
with minimum of two compression indents per wire, listed for use 
with copper and aluminum conductors. 


2. Insulate with materials approved for the particular use, location, 
voltage, and temperature. Insulation level shall be not less than 
the insulation level of the conductors being joined. 

3. Splice and insulation shall be product of the same manufacturer. 

2.3 CONNECTORS AND TERMINATIONS 

A. Mechanical type of high conductivity and corrosion-resistant material, 
listed for use with copper and aluminum conductors. 

B. Long barrel compression type of high conductivity and 
corrosion-resistant material, with minimum of two compression indents 
per wire, listed for use with copper and aluminum conductors. 

C. All bolts, nuts, and washers used to connect connections and 
terminations to bus bars or other termination points shall be cadmiumplated 
steel. 

2.4 CONTROL WIRING 

A. Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in these specifications, control 
wiring shall be as specified herein, except that the minimum size shall 
be not less than No. 14 AWG. 

B. Control wiring shall be sized such that the voltage drop under in-rush 
conditions does not adversely affect operation of the controls. 

2.5 WIRE LUBRICATING COMPOUND 

A. Lubricating compound shall be suitable for the wire insulation and 
conduit, and shall not harden or become adhesive. 

B. Shall not be used on conductors for isolated power systems. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 GENERAL 

A. Install conductors in accordance with the NEC, as specified, and as 
shown on the drawings. 

B. Install all conductors in raceway systems. 

C. Splice conductors only in outlet boxes, junction boxes, pullboxes, 
manholes, or handholes. 

D. Conductors of different systems (e.g., 120 V and 277 V) shall not be 
installed in the same raceway. 

E. Install cable supports for all vertical feeders in accordance with the 
NEC. Provide split wedge type which firmly clamps each individual cable 
and tightens due to cable weight. 


F. In panelboards, cabinets, wireways, switches, enclosures, and equipment 
assemblies, neatly form, train, and tie the conductors with nonmetallic 
ties. 

G. For connections to motors, transformers, and vibrating equipment, 
stranded conductors shall be used only from the last fixed point of 
connection to the motors, transformers, or vibrating equipment. 

H. Use expanding foam or non-hardening duct-seal to seal conduits entering 
a building, after installation of conductors. 

I. Conductor and Cable Pulling: 

1. Provide installation equipment that will prevent the cutting or 
abrasion of insulation during pulling. Use lubricants approved for 
the cable. 

2. Use nonmetallic pull ropes. 

3. Attach pull ropes by means of either woven basket grips or pulling 
eyes attached directly to the conductors. 

4. All conductors in a single conduit shall be pulled simultaneously. 

5. Do not exceed manufacturer’s recommended maximum pulling tensions 
and sidewall pressure values. 

J. No more than three branch circuits shall be installed in any one 
conduit. 

K. When stripping stranded conductors, use a tool that does not damage the 
conductor or remove conductor strands. 

3.2 SPLICE AND TERMINATION INSTALLATION 

A. Splices and terminations shall be mechanically and electrically secure, 
and tightened to manufacturer’s published torque values using a torque 
screwdriver or wrench. 

B. Where the Government determines that unsatisfactory splices or 
terminations have been installed, replace the splices or terminations 
at no additional cost to the Government. 

3.3 CONDUCTOR IDENTIFICATION 

A. When using colored tape to identify phase, neutral, and ground 
conductors larger than No. 8 AWG, apply tape in half-overlapping turns 
for a minimum of 75 mm (3 inches) from terminal points, and in junction 
boxes, pullboxes, and manholes. Apply the last two laps of tape with no 
tension to prevent possible unwinding. Where cable markings are covered 
by tape, apply tags to cable, stating size and insulation type. 


3.4 FEEDER CONDUCTOR IDENTIFICATION 

A. In each interior pullbox and each underground manhole and handhole, 
install brass tags on all feeder conductors to clearly designate their 
circuit identification and voltage. The tags shall be the embossed 
type, 40 mm (1-1/2 inches) in diameter and 40 mils thick. Attach tags 
with plastic ties. 

3.5 EXISTING CONDUCTORS 

A. Unless specifically indicated on the plans, existing conductors shall 
not be reused. 

3.6CONTROL WIRING INSTALLATION 

A. Unless otherwise specified in other sections, install control wiring 
and connect to equipment to perform the required functions as specified 
or as shown on the drawings. 

B. Install a separate power supply circuit for each system, except where 
otherwise shown on the drawings. 

3.8 CONTROL WIRING IDENTIFICATION 

A. Install a permanent wire marker on each wire at each termination. 

B. Identifying numbers and letters on the wire markers shall correspond to 
those on the wiring diagrams used for installing the systems. 

C. Wire markers shall retain their markings after cleaning. 

D. In each manhole and handhole, install embossed brass tags to identify 
the system served and function. 

3.9 ACCEPTANCE CHECKS AND TESTS 

A. Perform in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. In 
addition, include the following: 

1. Visual Inspection and Tests: Inspect physical condition. 

2. Electrical tests: 

a. After installation but before connection to utilization devices, 
such as fixtures, motors, or appliances, test conductors phaseto-
phase and phase-to-ground resistance with an insulation 
resistance tester. Existing conductors to be reused shall also 
be tested. 

b. Applied voltage shall be 500 V DC for 300 V rated cable, and 1000 
V DC for 600 V rated cable. Apply test for one minute or until 
reading is constant for 15 seconds, whichever is longer. Minimum 
insulation resistance values shall not be less than 25 megohms 
for 300 V rated cable and 100 megohms for 600 V rated cable. 


c. Perform phase rotation test on all three-phase circuits. 

---END--- 


SECTION 26 05 26 

GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies the furnishing, installation, connection, and 
testing of grounding and bonding equipment, indicated as grounding 
equipment in this section. 

B. “Grounding electrode system” refers to grounding electrode conductors 
and all electrodes required or allowed by NEC, as well as made, 
supplementary, and lightning protection system grounding electrodes. 

C. The terms “connect” and “bond” are used interchangeably in this section 
and have the same meaning. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS: 
Requirements that apply to all sections of Division 26. 

B. Section 26 05 19, LOW-VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLES: 
Low-voltage conductors. 

C. Section 26 05 33, RACEWAY AND BOXES FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS: Conduit and 
boxes. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Refer to Paragraph, QUALIFICATIONS (PRODUCTS AND SERVICES), in Section 
26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit six copies of the following in accordance with Section 26 05 11, 
REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1. Shop Drawings: 

a. Submit sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with 
drawings and specifications. 

b. Submit plans showing the location of system grounding electrodes 
and connections, and the routing of aboveground and underground 
grounding electrode conductors. 

2. Test Reports: 

a. Two weeks prior to the final inspection, submit ground resistance 
field test reports to the COTR. 

3. Certifications: 

a. Certification by the Contractor that the grounding equipment has 
been properly installed and tested. 


1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below (including amendments, addenda, revisions, 
supplements, and errata) form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by 
designation only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

B1-07...................Standard Specification for Hard-Drawn Copper 
Wire 

B3-07...................Standard Specification for Soft or Annealed 
Copper Wire 

B8-11...................Standard Specification for Concentric-Lay- 
Stranded Copper Conductors, Hard, Medium-Hard, 
or Soft 

C. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE): 

81-83...................IEEE Guide for Measuring Earth Resistivity, 
Ground Impedance, and Earth Surface Potentials 
of a Ground System Part 1: Normal Measurements 

D. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

70-11...................National Electrical Code (NEC) 

70E-12..................National Electrical Safety Code 

99-12...................Health Care Facilities 

E. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

44-10 ..................Thermoset-Insulated Wires and Cables 

83-08 ..................Thermoplastic-Insulated Wires and Cables 

467-07 .................Grounding and Bonding Equipment 

 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 GROUNDING AND BONDING CONDUCTORS 

A. Equipment grounding conductors shall be insulated stranded copper, 
except that sizes No. 10 AWG and smaller shall be solid copper. 
Insulation color shall be continuous green for all equipment grounding 
conductors, except that wire sizes No. 4 AWG and larger shall be 
identified per NEC. 

B. Bonding conductors shall be bare stranded copper, except that sizes No. 
10 AWG and smaller shall be bare solid copper. Bonding conductors 
shall be stranded for final connection to motors, transformers, and 
vibrating equipment. 


C. Conductor sizes shall not be less than shown on the drawings, or not 
less than required by the NEC, whichever is greater. 

D. Insulation: THHN-THWN and XHHW-2. XHHW-2 shall be used for isolated 
power systems. 

2.4 GROUND CONNECTIONS 

A. Below Grade and Inaccessible Locations: Exothermic-welded type 
connectors. 

B. Above Grade: 

1. Bonding Jumpers: Listed for use with aluminum and copper conductors. 
For wire sizes No. 8 AWG and larger, use compression-type 
connectors. For wire sizes smaller than No. 8 AWG, use mechanical 
type lugs. Connectors or lugs shall use zinc-plated steel bolts, 
nuts, and washers. Bolts shall be torqued to the values recommended 
by the manufacturer. 

2. Connection to Building Steel: Exothermic-welded type connectors. 

3. Connection to Grounding Bus Bars: Listed for use with aluminum and 
copper conductors. Use mechanical type lugs, with zinc-plated steel 
bolts, nuts, and washers. Bolts shall be torqued to the values 
recommended by the manufacturer. 

4. Connection to Equipment Rack and Cabinet Ground Bars: Listed for use 
with aluminum and copper conductors. Use mechanical type lugs, with 
zinc-plated steel bolts, nuts, and washers. Bolts shall be torqued 
to the values recommended by the manufacturer. 

2.5 EQUIPMENT RACK AND CABINET GROUND BARS 

A. Provide solid copper ground bars designed for mounting on the framework 
of open or cabinet-enclosed equipment racks. Ground bars shall have 
minimum dimensions of 6.3 mm (0.25 inch) thick x 19 mm (0.75 inch) 
wide, with length as required or as shown on the drawings. Provide 
insulators and mounting brackets. 

2.6 GROUND TERMINAL BLOCKS 

A. At any equipment mounting location (e.g., backboards and hinged cover 
enclosures) where rack-type ground bars cannot be mounted, provide 
mechanical type lugs, with zinc-plated steel bolts, nuts, and washers. 
Bolts shall be torqued to the values recommended by the manufacturer. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 GENERAL 

A. Install grounding equipment in accordance with the NEC, as shown on the 
drawings, and as specified herein. 


B. System Grounding: 

1. Secondary service neutrals: Ground at the supply side of the 
secondary disconnecting means and at the related transformer. 

2. Separately derived systems (transformers downstream from the service 
entrance): Ground the secondary neutral. 

C. Equipment Grounding: Metallic piping, building structural steel, 
electrical enclosures, raceways, junction boxes, outlet boxes, 
cabinets, machine frames, and other conductive items in close proximity 
with electrical circuits, shall be bonded and grounded. 

D. For patient care area electrical power system grounding, conform to 
NFPA 99 and NEC. 

3.2 INACCESSIBLE GROUNDING CONNECTIONS 

A. Make grounding connections, which are normally buried or otherwise 
inaccessible, by exothermic weld. 

3.3 MEDIUM-VOLTAGE EQUIPMENT AND CIRCUITS 

A. Switchgear: Provide a bare grounding electrode conductor from the 
switchgear ground bus to the grounding electrode system. 

3.4 SECONDARY VOLTAGE EQUIPMENT AND CIRCUITS 

A. Main Bonding Jumper: Bond the secondary service neutral to the ground 
bus in the service equipment. 

B. Metallic Piping, Building Structural Steel, and Supplemental 
Electrode(s): 

1. Provide a grounding electrode conductor sized per NEC between the 
service equipment ground bus and all metallic water pipe systems, 
building structural steel, and supplemental or made electrodes. 
Provide jumpers across insulating joints in the metallic piping. 

2. Provide a supplemental ground electrode as shown on the drawings and 
bond to the grounding electrode system. 

C. Switchgear, Switchboards, Unit Substations, Panelboards, Motor Control 
Centers, Engine-Generators, Automatic Transfer Switches, and other 
electrical equipment: 

1. Connect the equipment grounding conductors to the ground bus. 

2. Connect metallic conduits by grounding bushings and equipment 
grounding conductor to the equipment ground bus. 

D. Transformers: 

1. Exterior: Exterior transformers supplying interior service equipment 
shall have the neutral grounded at the transformer secondary. 
Provide a grounding electrode at the transformer. 


2. Separately derived systems (transformers downstream from service 
equipment): Ground the secondary neutral at the transformer. Provide 
a grounding electrode conductor from the transformer to the nearest 
component of the grounding electrode system. 

3.5 RACEWAY 

A. Conduit Systems: 

1. Ground all metallic conduit systems. All metallic conduit systems 
shall contain an equipment grounding conductor. 

2. Non-metallic conduit systems, except non-metallic feeder conduits 
that carry a grounded conductor from exterior transformers to 
interior or building-mounted service entrance equipment, shall 
contain an equipment grounding conductor. 

3. Metallic conduit that only contains a grounding conductor, and is 
provided for its mechanical protection, shall be bonded to that 
conductor at the entrance and exit from the conduit. 

4. Metallic conduits which terminate without mechanical connection to 
an electrical equipment housing by means of locknut and bushings or 
adapters, shall be provided with grounding bushings. Connect 
bushings with a equipment grounding conductor to the equipment 
ground bus. 

B. Feeders and Branch Circuits: Install equipment grounding conductors 
with all feeders, and power and lighting branch circuits. 

C. Boxes, Cabinets, Enclosures, and Panelboards: 

1. Bond the equipment grounding conductor to each pullbox, junction 
box, outlet box, device box, cabinets, and other enclosures through 
which the conductor passes (except for special grounding systems for 
intensive care units and other critical units shown). 

2. Provide lugs in each box and enclosure for equipment grounding 
conductor termination. 

D. Wireway Systems: 

1. Bond the metallic structures of wireway to provide electrical 
continuity throughout the wireway system, by connecting a No. 6 AWG 
bonding jumper at all intermediate metallic enclosures and across 
all section junctions. 

2. Install insulated No. 6 AWG bonding jumpers between the wireway 
system, bonded as required above, and the closest building ground at 
each end and approximately every 16 M (50 feet). 


3. Use insulated No. 6 AWG bonding jumpers to ground or bond metallic 
wireway at each end for all intermediate metallic enclosures and 
across all section junctions. 

4. Use insulated No. 6 AWG bonding jumpers to ground cable tray to 
column-mounted building ground plates (pads) at each end and 
approximately every 15 M (49 feet). 

E. Receptacles shall not be grounded through their mounting screws. Ground 
receptacles with a jumper from the receptacle green ground terminal to 
the device box ground screw and a jumper to the branch circuit 
equipment grounding conductor. 

F. Ground lighting fixtures to the equipment grounding conductor of the 
wiring system. Fixtures connected with flexible conduit shall have a 
green ground wire included with the power wires from the fixture 
through the flexible conduit to the first outlet box. 

G. Fixed electrical appliances and equipment shall be provided with a 
ground lug for termination of the equipment grounding conductor. 

H. Raised Floors: Provide bonding for all raised floor components as shown 
on the drawings. 

I. Panelboard Bonding in Patient Care Areas: The equipment grounding 
terminal buses of the normal and essential branch circuit panel boards 
serving the same individual patient vicinity shall be bonded together 
with an insulated continuous copper conductor not less than No. 10 AWG, 
installed in rigid metal conduit. 

3.6 CORROSION INHIBITORS 

A. When making grounding and bonding connections, apply a corrosion 
inhibitor to all contact surfaces. Use corrosion inhibitor appropriate 
for protecting a connection between the metals used. 

3.7 CONDUCTIVE PIPING 

A. Bond all conductive piping systems, interior and exterior, to the 
grounding electrode system. Bonding connections shall be made as close 
as practical to the equipment ground bus. 

B. In operating rooms and at intensive care and coronary care type beds, 
bond the medical gas piping and medical vacuum piping at the outlets 
directly to the patient ground bus. 

3.14 ACCEPTANCE CHECKS AND TESTS 

A. Resistance of the grounding electrode system shall be measured using a 
four-terminal fall-of-potential method as defined in IEEE 81. Ground 
resistance measurements shall be made before the electrical 


distribution system is energized or connected to the electric utility 
company ground system, and shall be made in normally dry conditions not 
fewer than 48 hours after the last rainfall. 

B. Resistance measurements of separate grounding electrode systems shall 
be made before the systems are bonded together. The combined 
resistance of separate systems may be used to meet the required 
resistance, but the specified number of electrodes must still be 
provided. 

---END--- 


SECTION 26 05 33 
RACEWAY AND BOXES FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies the furnishing, installation, and connection of 
conduit, fittings, and boxes, to form complete, coordinated, grounded 
raceway systems. Raceways are required for all wiring unless shown or 
specified otherwise. 

B. Definitions: The term conduit, as used in this specification, shall 
mean any or all of the raceway types specified. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 06 10 00, ROUGH CARPENTRY: Mounting board for telephone 
closets. 

B. Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING: Sealing around penetrations to maintain 
the integrity of fire rated construction. 

C. Section 07 92 00, JOINT SEALANTS: Sealing around conduit penetrations 
through the building envelope to prevent moisture migration into the 
building. 

D. Section 09 91 00, PAINTING: Identification and painting of conduit and 
other devices. 

E. Section 26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS: General 
electrical requirements and items that are common to more than one 
section of Division 26. 

F. Section 26 05 26, GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS: 
Requirements for personnel safety and to provide a low impedance path 
for possible ground fault currents. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

 Refer to Paragraph, QUALIFICATIONS, in Section 26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS 
FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit six copies of the following in accordance with Section 26 05 11, 
REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1. Shop Drawings: 

a. Size and location of main feeders. 

b. Size and location of panels and pull-boxes. 

c. Layout of required conduit penetrations through structural 
elements. 


d. Submit the following data for approval: 

1) Raceway types and sizes. 

2) Conduit bodies, connectors and fittings. 

3) Junction and pull boxes, types and sizes. 

2. Certifications: Two weeks prior to final inspection, submit the 
following: 

a. Certification by the manufacturer that raceways, conduits, 
conduit bodies, connectors, fittings, junction and pull boxes, 
and all related equipment conform to the requirements of the 
drawings and specifications. 

b. Certification by the Contractor that raceways, conduits, conduit 
bodies, connectors, fittings, junction and pull boxes, and all 
related equipment have been properly installed. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below (including amendments, addenda, revisions, 
supplements, and errata) form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by 
designation only. 

B. American National Standards Institute (ANSI): 

C80.1-05................Electrical Rigid Steel Conduit 

C80.3-05................Steel Electrical Metal Tubing 

C80.6-05................Electrical Intermediate Metal Conduit 

C. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

70-11...................National Electrical Code (NEC) 

D. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

1-05....................Flexible Metal Conduit 

5-11....................Surface Metal Raceway and Fittings 

6-07....................Electrical Rigid Metal Conduit - Steel 

50-95...................Enclosures for Electrical Equipment 

360-13..................Liquid-Tight Flexible Steel Conduit 

467-13..................Grounding and Bonding Equipment 

514A-13.................Metallic Outlet Boxes 

514B-12.................Conduit, Tubing, and Cable Fittings 

514C-07.................Nonmetallic Outlet Boxes, Flush-Device Boxes 
and Covers 

651-11..................Schedule 40 and 80 Rigid PVC Conduit and 
Fittings 


651A-11.................Type EB and A Rigid PVC Conduit and HDPE 
Conduit 

797-07..................Electrical Metallic Tubing 

1242-06.................Electrical Intermediate Metal Conduit - Steel 

E. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA): 

TC-2-13.................Electrical Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Tubing and 
Conduit 

TC-3-13.................PVC Fittings for Use with Rigid PVC Conduit and 
Tubing 

FB1-12..................Fittings, Cast Metal Boxes and Conduit Bodies 
for Conduit, Electrical Metallic Tubing and 
Cable 

FB2.10-13...............Selection and Installation Guidelines for 
Fittings for use with Non-Flexible Conduit or 
Tubing (Rigid Metal Conduit, Intermediate 
Metallic Conduit, and Electrical Metallic 
Tubing) 

FB2.20-12...............Selection and Installation Guidelines for 
Fittings for use with Flexible Electrical 
Conduit and Cable 

F. American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI): 

S100-2007...............North American Specification for the Design of 
Cold-Formed Steel Structural Members 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIAL 

A. Conduit Size: In accordance with the NEC, but not less than 13 mm 
(0.5-inch) unless otherwise shown. Where permitted by the NEC, 13 mm 
(0.5-inch) flexible conduit may be used for tap connections to recessed 
lighting fixtures. 

B. Conduit: 

1. Size: In accordance with the NEC, but not less than 13 mm (0.5- 
inch). 

2. Rigid Steel Conduit (RMC): Shall conform to UL 6 and ANSI C80.1. 

3. Electrical Metallic Tubing Fittings: 

a. Fittings and conduit bodies shall meet the requirements of UL 
514B, ANSI C80.3, and NEMA FB1. 

b. Only steel or malleable iron materials are acceptable. 


c. Compression Couplings and Connectors: Concrete-tight and raintight, 
with connectors having insulated throats. 

d. Indent-type connectors or couplings are prohibited. 

e. Die-cast or pressure-cast zinc-alloy fittings or fittings made of 
"pot metal" are prohibited. 

4. Flexible Metal Conduit Fittings: 

a. Conform to UL 514B. Only steel or malleable iron materials are 
acceptable. 

b. Clamp-type, with insulated throat. 

5. Liquid-tight Flexible Metal Conduit Fittings: 

a. Fittings shall meet the requirements of UL 514B and NEMA FB1. 

b. Only steel or malleable iron materials are acceptable. 

c. Fittings must incorporate a threaded grounding cone, a steel or 
plastic compression ring, and a gland for tightening. Connectors 
shall have insulated throats. 

6. Surface Metal Raceway Fittings: As recommended by the raceway 
manufacturer. Include couplings, offsets, elbows, expansion joints, 
adapters, hold-down straps, end caps, conduit entry fittings, 
accessories, and other fittings as required for complete system. 

7. Expansion and Deflection Couplings: 

a. Conform to UL 467 and UL 514B. 

b. Accommodate a 19 mm (0.75-inch) deflection, expansion, or 
contraction in any direction, and allow 30 degree angular 
deflections. 

c. Include internal flexible metal braid, sized to guarantee conduit 
ground continuity and a low-impedance path for fault currents, in 
accordance with UL 467 and the NEC tables for equipment grounding 
conductors. 

d. Jacket: Flexible, corrosion-resistant, watertight, moisture and 
heat-resistant molded rubber material with stainless steel jacket 
clamps. 

D. Conduit Supports: 

1. Parts and Hardware: Zinc-coat or provide equivalent corrosion 
protection. 

2. Individual Conduit Hangers: Designed for the purpose, having a 
pre-assembled closure bolt and nut, and provisions for receiving a 
hanger rod. 


3. Multiple Conduit (Trapeze) Hangers: Not less than 38 mm x 38 mm 
(1.5 x 1.5 inches), 12-gauge steel, cold-formed, lipped channels; 
with not less than 9 mm (0.375-inch) diameter steel hanger rods. 

4. Solid Masonry and Concrete Anchors: Self-drilling expansion 
shields, or machine bolt expansion. 

E. Outlet, Junction, and Pull Boxes: 

1. UL-50 and UL-514A. 

2. Rustproof cast metal where required by the NEC or shown on drawings. 

3. Sheet Metal Boxes: Galvanized steel, except where shown on 
drawings. 

F. Metal Wireways: Equip with hinged covers, except as shown on drawings. 
Include couplings, offsets, elbows, expansion joints, adapters, holddown 
straps, end caps, and other fittings to match and mate with 
wireways as required for a complete system. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 PENETRATIONS 

A. Cutting or Holes: 

1. Cut holes in advance where they should be placed in the structural 
elements, such as ribs or beams. Obtain the approval of the COR 
prior to drilling through structural elements. 

2. Cut holes through concrete and masonry in new and existing 
structures with a diamond core drill or concrete saw. Pneumatic 
hammers, impact electric, hand, or manual hammer-type drills are not 
allowed, except when permitted by the COR where working space is 
limited. 

B. Firestop: Where conduits, wireways, and other electrical raceways pass 
through fire partitions, fire walls, smoke partitions, or floors, 
install a fire stop that provides an effective barrier against the 
spread of fire, smoke and gases as specified in Section 07 84 00, 
FIRESTOPPING. 

3.2 INSTALLATION, GENERAL 

A. In accordance with UL, NEC, NEMA, as shown on drawings, and as 
specified herein. 

B. Raceway systems used for Essential Electrical Systems (EES) shall be 
entirely independent of other raceway systems. 

C. Install conduit as follows: 

1. In complete mechanically and electrically continuous runs before 
pulling in cables or wires. 


2. Unless otherwise indicated on the drawings or specified herein, 
installation of all conduits shall be concealed within finished 
walls, floors, and ceilings. 

3. Flattened, dented, or deformed conduit is not permitted. Remove and 
replace the damaged conduits with new conduits. 

4. Assure conduit installation does not encroach into the ceiling 
height head room, walkways, or doorways. 

5. Cut conduits square, ream, remove burrs, and draw up tight. 

6. Independently support conduit at 2.4 M (8 feet) on centers with 
specified materials and as shown on drawings. 

7. Do not use suspended ceilings, suspended ceiling supporting members, 
lighting fixtures, other conduits, cable tray, boxes, piping, or 
ducts to support conduits and conduit runs. 

8. Support within 300 mm (12 inches) of changes of direction, and 
within 300 mm (12 inches) of each enclosure to which connected. 

9. Close ends of empty conduits with plugs or caps at the rough-in 
stage until wires are pulled in, to prevent entry of debris. 

10. Conduit installations under fume and vent hoods are prohibited. 

11. Secure conduits to cabinets, junction boxes, pull-boxes, and outlet 
boxes with bonding type locknuts. For rigid steel and IMC conduit 
installations, provide a locknut on the inside of the enclosure, 
made up wrench tight. Do not make conduit connections to junction 
box covers. 

12. Flashing of penetrations of the roof membrane is specified in 
Section 07 60 00, FLASHING AND SHEET METAL. 

13. Conduit bodies shall only be used for changes in direction, and 
shall not contain splices. 

D. Conduit Bends: 

1. Make bends with standard conduit bending machines. 

2. Conduit hickey may be used for slight offsets and for straightening 
stubbed out conduits. 

3. Bending of conduits with a pipe tee or vise is prohibited. 

E. Layout and Homeruns: 

1. Install conduit with wiring, including homeruns, as shown on 
drawings. 

2. Deviations: Make only where necessary to avoid interferences and 
only after drawings showing the proposed deviations have been 
submitted and approved by the COR. 


3.3 CONCEALED WORK INSTALLATION 

A. In Concrete: 

1. Conduit: Rigid steel, IMC, or EMT. Do not install EMT in concrete 
slabs that are in contact with soil, gravel, or vapor barriers. 

2. Align and run conduit in direct lines. 

3. Install conduit through concrete beams only: 

a. Where shown on the structural drawings. 

b. As approved by the COR prior to construction, and after submittal 
of drawing showing location, size, and position of each 
penetration. 

4. Installation of conduit in concrete that is less than 75 mm (3 
inches) thick is prohibited. 

a. Conduit outside diameter larger than one-third of the slab 
thickness is prohibited. 

b. Space between conduits in slabs: Approximately six conduit 
diameters apart, and one conduit diameter at conduit crossings. 

c. Install conduits approximately in the center of the slab so that 
there will be a minimum of 19 mm (0.75-inch) of concrete around 
the conduits. 

5. Make couplings and connections watertight. Use thread compounds 
that are UL approved conductive type to ensure low resistance ground 
continuity through the conduits. Tightening setscrews with pliers 
is prohibited. 

B. Above Furred or Suspended Ceilings and in Walls: 

1. Conduit for Conductors 600 V and Below: Rigid steel, IMC, or EMT. 
Mixing different types of conduits in the same system is prohibited. 

2. Align and run conduit parallel or perpendicular to the building 
lines. 

3. Connect recessed lighting fixtures to conduit runs with maximum 1.8 
M (6 feet) of flexible metal conduit extending from a junction box 
to the fixture. 

4. Tightening set screws with pliers is prohibited. 

5. For conduits running through metal studs, limit field cut holes to 
no more than 70% of web depth. Spacing between holes shall be at 
least 457 mm (18 inches). Cuts or notches in flanges or return lips 
shall not be permitted. 


3.4 EXPOSED WORK INSTALLATION 

A. Unless otherwise indicated on drawings, exposed conduit is only 
permitted in mechanical and electrical rooms. 

B. Conduit for Conductors 600 V and Below: Rigid steel, IMC, or EMT. 
Mixing different types of conduits in the system is prohibited. 

C. Align and run conduit parallel or perpendicular to the building lines. 

D. Install horizontal runs close to the ceiling or beams and secure with 
conduit straps. 

E. Support horizontal or vertical runs at not over 2.4 M (8 feet) 
intervals. 

F. Surface Metal Raceways: Use only where shown on drawings. 

G. Painting: 

1. Paint exposed conduit as specified in Section 09 91 00, PAINTING. 

2. Paint all conduits containing cables rated over 600 V safety orange. 
Refer to Section 09 91 00, PAINTING for preparation, paint type, and 
exact color. In addition, paint legends, using 50 mm (2 inch) high 
black numerals and letters, showing the cable voltage rating. 
Provide legends where conduits pass through walls and floors and at 
maximum 6 M (20 feet) intervals in between. 

3.8 MOTORS AND VIBRATING EQUIPMENT 

A. Use flexible metal conduit for connections to motors and other 
electrical equipment subject to movement, vibration, misalignment, 
cramped quarters, or noise transmission. 

B. Use liquid-tight flexible metal conduit for installation in exterior 
locations, moisture or humidity laden atmosphere, corrosive atmosphere, 
water or spray wash-down operations, inside airstream of HVAC units, 
and locations subject to seepage or dripping of oil, grease, or water. 

C. Provide a green equipment grounding conductor with flexible and liquidtight 
flexible metal conduit. 

3.9 EXPANSION JOINTS 

A. Conduits 75 mm (3 inch) and larger that are secured to the building 
structure on opposite sides of a building expansion joint require 
expansion and deflection couplings. Install the couplings in 
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 

B. Provide conduits smaller than 75 mm (3 inch) with junction boxes on 
both sides of the expansion joint. Connect flexible metal conduits to 
junction boxes with sufficient slack to produce a 125 mm (5 inch) 
vertical drop midway between the ends of the flexible metal conduit. 


Flexible metal conduit shall have a green insulated copper bonding 
jumper installed. In lieu of this flexible metal conduit, expansion and 
deflection couplings as specified above are acceptable. 

C. Install expansion and deflection couplings where shown. 

3.10 CONDUIT SUPPORTS 

A. Safe working load shall not exceed one-quarter of proof test load of 
fastening devices. 

B. Use pipe straps or individual conduit hangers for supporting individual 
conduits. 

C. Support multiple conduit runs with trapeze hangers. Use trapeze 
hangers that are designed to support a load equal to or greater than 
the sum of the weights of the conduits, wires, hanger itself, and an 
additional 90 kg (200 lbs). Attach each conduit with U-bolts or other 
approved fasteners. 

D. Support conduit independently of junction boxes, pull-boxes, fixtures, 
suspended ceiling T-bars, angle supports, and similar items. 

E. Fasteners and Supports in Solid Masonry and Concrete: 

1. New Construction: Use steel or malleable iron concrete inserts set 
in place prior to placing the concrete. 

2. Existing Construction: 

a. Steel expansion anchors not less than 6 mm (0.25-inch) bolt size 
and not less than 28 mm (1.125 inch) in embedment. 

b. Power set fasteners not less than 6 mm (0.25-inch) diameter with 
depth of penetration not less than 75 mm (3 inch). 

c. Use vibration and shock-resistant anchors and fasteners for 
attaching to concrete ceilings. 

F. Hollow Masonry: Toggle bolts. 

G. Bolts supported only by plaster or gypsum wallboard are not acceptable. 

H. Metal Structures: Use machine screw fasteners or other devices 
specifically designed and approved for the application. 

I. Attachment by wood plugs, rawl plug, plastic, lead or soft metal 
anchors, or wood blocking and bolts supported only by plaster is 
prohibited. 

J. Chain, wire, or perforated strap shall not be used to support or fasten 
conduit. 

K. Spring steel type supports or fasteners are prohibited for all uses 
except horizontal and vertical supports/fasteners within walls. 


L. Vertical Supports: Vertical conduit runs shall have riser clamps and 
supports in accordance with the NEC and as shown. Provide supports for 
cable and wire with fittings that include internal wedges and retaining 
collars. 

3.11 BOX INSTALLATION 

A. Boxes for Concealed Conduits: 

1. Flush-mounted. 

2. Provide raised covers for boxes to suit the wall or ceiling, 
construction, and finish. 

B. In addition to boxes shown, install additional boxes where needed to 
prevent damage to cables and wires during pulling-in operations or 
where more than the equivalent of 4-90 degree bends are necessary. 

C. Locate pullboxes so that covers are accessible and easily removed. 
Coordinate locations with piping and ductwork where installed above 
ceilings. 

D. Remove only knockouts as required. Plug unused openings. Use threaded 
plugs for cast metal boxes and snap-in metal covers for sheet metal 
boxes. 

E. Outlet boxes mounted back-to-back in the same wall are prohibited. A 
minimum 600 mm (24 inch) center-to-center lateral spacing shall be 
maintained between boxes. 

F. Flush-mounted wall or ceiling boxes shall be installed with raised 
covers so that the front face of raised cover is flush with the wall. 
Surface-mounted wall or ceiling boxes shall be installed with surfacestyle 
flat or raised covers. 

G. Minimum size of outlet boxes for ground fault circuit interrupter 
(GFCI) receptacles is 100 mm (4 inches) square x 55 mm (2.125 inches) 
deep, with device covers for the wall material and thickness involved. 

H. Stencil or install phenolic nameplates on covers of the boxes 
identified on riser diagrams; for example "SIG-FA JB No. 1." 

I. On all branch circuit junction box covers, identify the circuits with 
black marker. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 26 09 23 
LIGHTING CONTROLS 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

 This section specifies the furnishing, installation and connection of 
the lighting controls. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS: General 
requirements that are common to more than one section of Division 26. 

B. Section 26 05 19, LOW-VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLES 
(600 VOLTS AND BELOW): Cables and wiring. 

C. Section 26 05 26, GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS: 
Requirements for personnel safety and to provide a low impedance path 
to ground for possible ground fault currents. 

D. Section 26 27 26, WIRING DEVICES: Wiring devices used for control of 
the lighting systems. 

E. Section 26 51 00, INTERIOR LIGHTING: Luminaire ballast and drivers used 
in control of lighting systems. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Refer to Paragraph, QUALIFICATIONS (PRODUCTS AND SERVICES), in Section 
26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit six copies of the following in accordance with Section 26 05 11, 
REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1. Shop Drawings: 

a. Submit the following information for each type of lighting 
controls. 

b. Material and construction details. 

c. Physical dimensions and description. 

d. Wiring schematic and connection diagram. 

e. Installation details. 

2. Manuals: 

a. Submit, simultaneously with the shop drawings, complete 
maintenance and operating manuals, including technical data 
sheets, wiring diagrams, and information for ordering replacement 
parts. 


b. If changes have been made to the maintenance and operating 
manuals originally submitted, submit updated maintenance and 
operating manuals two weeks prior to the final inspection. 

3. Certifications: Two weeks prior to final inspection, submit the 
following. 

a. Certification by the Contractor that the lighting control systems 
have been properly installed and tested. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below (including amendments, addenda, revisions, 
supplements, and errata) form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by 
designation only. 

B. Green Seal (GS): 

GC-12-03................Occupancy Sensors 

C. National Electrical Manufacturer's Association (NEMA): 

C136.10-10..............American National Standard for Roadway and Area 
Lighting Equipment—Locking-Type Photocontrol 
Devices and Mating Receptacles—Physical and 
Electrical Interchangeability and Testing 

ICS-1-08................Standard for Industrial Control and Systems 
General Requirements 

ICS-2-05................Standard for Industrial Control and Systems: 
Controllers, Contractors, and Overload Relays 
Rated Not More than 2000 Volts AC or 750 Volts 
DC: Part 8 - Disconnect Devices for Use in 
Industrial Control Equipment 

ICS-6-11................Standard for Industrial Controls and Systems 
Enclosures 

D. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

70-14...................National Electrical Code (NEC) 

E. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

20......................Standard for General-Use Snap Switches 

773-95..................Standard for Plug-In Locking Type Photocontrols 
for Use with Area Lighting 

773A-06.................Nonindustrial Photoelectric Switches for 
Lighting Control 

98-04...................Enclosed and Dead-Front Switches 


916-07..................Standard for Energy Management Equipment 
Systems 

917-06..................Clock Operated Switches 

924-06..................Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment (for use 
when controlling emergency circuits). 

PART 2 – PRODUCTS 

2.1 CEILING-MOUNTED PHOTOELECTRIC SWITCHES 

A. Solid-state, light-level sensor unit, with separate relay unit. 

1. Sensor Output: Contacts rated to operate the associated relay. 
Sensor shall be powered from the relay unit. 

2. Relay Unit: Dry contacts rated for 20A ballast load at 120 volt and 
277 volt, for 13A tungsten at 120 volt, and for 1 hp at 120 volt. 

3. Monitoring Range: 108 to 2152 lx (10 to 200 fc), with an adjustment 
for turn-on and turn-off levels. 

4. Time Delay: Adjustable from 5 to 300 seconds, with deadband 
adjustment. 

5. Indicator: Two LEDs to indicate the beginning of on-off cycles. 

2.2 INDOOR OCCUPANCY SENSORS 

A. Wall- or ceiling-mounting, solid-state units with a power supply and 
relay unit, suitable for the environmental conditions in which 
installed. 

1. Operation: Unless otherwise indicated, turn lights on when covered 
area is occupied and off when unoccupied; with a 1 to 15 minute 
adjustable time delay for turning lights off. 

2. Sensor Output: Contacts rated to operate the connected relay. 
Sensor shall be powered from the relay unit. 

3. Relay Unit: Dry contacts rated for 20A ballast load at 120 volt and 
277 volt, for 13A tungsten at 120 volt, and for 1 hp at 120 volt. 

4. Mounting: 

a. Sensor: Suitable for mounting in any position on a standard 
outlet box. 

b. Time-Delay and Sensitivity Adjustments: Recessed and concealed 
behind hinged door. 

5. Indicator: LED, to show when motion is being detected during 
testing and normal operation of the sensor. 

6. Bypass Switch: Override the on function in case of sensor failure. 

7. Manual/automatic selector switch. 


8. Automatic Light-Level Sensor: Adjustable from 21.5 to 2152 lx (2 to 
200 fc); keep lighting off when selected lighting level is present. 

9. Faceplate for Wall-Switch Replacement Type: Refer to wall plate 
material and color requirements for toggle switches, as specified in 
Section 26 27 26, WIRING DEVICES. 

B. Dual-technology Type: Ceiling mounting; combination PIR and ultrasonic 
detection methods, field-selectable. 

1. Sensitivity Adjustment: Separate for each sensing technology. 

2. Detector Sensitivity: Detect occurrences of 150 mm (6-inch) minimum 
movement of any portion of a human body that presents a target of 
not less than 232 sq. cm (36 sq. in), and detect a person of average 
size and weight moving not less than 305 mm (12 inches) in either a 
horizontal or a vertical manner at an approximate speed of 305 mm/s 
(12 inches/s). 

C. Detection Coverage: Shall be sufficient to provide coverage as required 
by sensor locations shown on drawing. 

 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Installation shall be in accordance with the NEC, manufacturer's 
instructions and as shown on the drawings or specified. 

B. Aim outdoor photoelectric sensor according to manufacturer's 
recommendations. Set adjustable window slide for 1 footcandle turn-on. 

C. Aiming for wall-mounted and ceiling-mounted motion sensor switches 
shall be per manufacturer’s recommendations. 

D. Set occupancy sensor "on" duration to 15 minutes. 

E. Locate photoelectric sensors as indicated and in accordance with the 
manufacturer's recommendations. Adjust sensor for the available light 
level at the typical work plane for that area. 

F. Label time switches and contactors with a unique designation. 

G. Program lighting control panels per schedule on drawings. 

3.2 ACCEPTANCE CHECKS AND TESTS 

A. Perform in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 

B. Upon completion of installation, conduct an operating test to show that 
equipment operates in accordance with requirements of this section. 

C. Test for full range of dimming ballast and dimming controls capability. 
Observe for visually detectable flicker over full dimming range. 


D. Test occupancy sensors for proper operation. Observe for light control 
over entire area being covered. 

E. Upon completion of the installation, the system shall be commissioned 
by the manufacturer’s factory-authorized technician who will verify all 
adjustments and sensor placements. 

3.3 FOLLOW-UP VERIFICATION 

 Upon completion of acceptance checks and tests, the Contractor shall 
show by demonstration in service that the lighting control devices are 
in good operating condition and properly performing the intended 
function in the presence of COR. 

3.4 INSTRUCTION 

A. Furnish the services of a factory-trained technician for one 8-hour 
training period for instructing personnel in the maintenance and 
operation of the lighting control system on the dates requested by the 
COR. 

B. Contractor shall submit written instructions on training and 
maintenance as reviewed in training session. 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 26 27 26 
WIRING DEVICES 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies the furnishing, installation, connection, and 
testing of wiring devices. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS: General 
electrical requirements that are common to more than one section of 
Division 26. 

B. Section 26 05 33, RACEWAY AND BOXES FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS: Conduit and 
boxes. 

C. Section 26 05 19, LOW-VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLES: 
Cables and wiring. 

D. Section 26 05 26, GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS: 
Requirements for personnel safety and to provide a low impedance path 
to ground for possible ground fault currents. 

E. Section 26 51 00, INTERIOR LIGHTING: Fluorescent ballasts and LED 
drivers for use with manual dimming controls. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Refer to Paragraph, QUALIFICATIONS (PRODUCTS AND SERVICES), in Section 
26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit six copies of the following in accordance with Section 26 05 11, 
REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1. Shop Drawings: 

a. Submit sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with 
drawings and specifications. 

b. Include electrical ratings, dimensions, mounting details, 
construction materials, grade, and termination information. 

2. Manuals: 

a. Submit, simultaneously with the shop drawings, companion copies 
of complete maintenance and operating manuals, including 
technical data sheets and information for ordering replacement 
parts. 

b. If changes have been made to the maintenance and operating 
manuals originally submitted, submit updated maintenance and 
operating manuals two weeks prior to the final inspection. 


3. Certifications: Two weeks prior to final inspection, submit the 
following. 

a. Certification by the manufacturer that the wiring devices conform 
to the requirements of the drawings and specifications. 

b. Certification by the Contractor that the wiring devices have been 
properly installed and adjusted. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below (including amendments, addenda, revisions, 
supplements and errata) form a part of this specification to the extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by basic 
designation only. 

B. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

70-11...................National Electrical Code (NEC) 

99-12...................Health Care Facilities 

C. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA): 

WD 1-10.................General Color Requirements for Wiring Devices 

WD 6-08 ................Wiring Devices – Dimensional Specifications 

D. Underwriter’s Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

5-11....................Surface Metal Raceways and Fittings 

20-10...................General-Use Snap Switches 

231-07..................Power Outlets 

467-07..................Grounding and Bonding Equipment 

498-07..................Attachment Plugs and Receptacles 

943-11..................Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupters 

1449-07.................Surge Protective Devices 

1472-96.................Solid State Dimming Controls 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 RECEPTACLES 

A. General: All receptacles shall comply with NEMA, NFPA, UL, and as shown 
on the drawings. 

1. Mounting straps shall be plated steel, with break-off plaster ears 
and shall include a self-grounding feature. Terminal screws shall 
be brass, brass plated or a copper alloy metal. 

2. Receptacles shall have provisions for back wiring with separate 
metal clamp type terminals (four minimum) and side wiring from four 
captively held binding screws. 


B. Duplex Receptacles: Hospital-grade, single phase, 20 ampere, 120 volts, 
2-pole, 3-wire, NEMA 5-20R, with break-off feature for two-circuit 
operation. 

1. Bodies shall be ivory in color. 

2. Switched duplex receptacles shall be wired so that only the top 
receptacle is switched. The lower receptacle shall be unswitched. 

3. Duplex Receptacles on Emergency Circuit: 

a. In rooms without emergency powered general lighting, the 
emergency receptacles shall be of the self-illuminated type. 

4. Ground Fault Interrupter Duplex Receptacles: Shall be an integral 
unit, hospital-grade, suitable for mounting in a standard outlet 
box, with end-of-life indication and provisions to isolate the face 
due to improper wiring. 

a. Ground fault interrupter shall be consist of a differential 
current transformer, solid state sensing circuitry and a circuit 
interrupter switch. Device shall have nominal sensitivity to 
ground leakage current of 4-6 milliamperes and shall function to 
interrupt the current supply for any value of ground leakage 
current above five milliamperes (+ or – 1 milliampere) on the 
load side of the device. Device shall have a minimum nominal 
tripping time of 0.025 second. 

b. Ground Fault Interrupter Duplex Receptacles (not hospital-grade) 
shall be the same as ground fault interrupter hospital-grade 
receptacles except for the hospital-grade listing. 

5. Safety Type Duplex Receptacles: 

a. Bodies shall be gray in color. 

1) Shall permit current to flow only while a standard plug is in 
the proper position in the receptacle. 

2) Screws exposed while the wall plates are in place shall be the 
tamperproof type. 

6. Duplex Receptacles (not hospital grade): Shall be the same as 
hospital grade duplex receptacles except for the hospital grade 
listing and as follows. 

a. Bodies shall be brown nylon. 

C. Receptacles; 20, 30, and 50 ampere, 250 Volts: Shall be complete with 
appropriate cord grip plug. 

D. Weatherproof Receptacles: Shall consist of a duplex receptacle, mounted 
in box with a gasketed, weatherproof, cast metal cover plate and cap 


over each receptacle opening. The cap shall be permanently attached to 
the cover plate by a spring-hinged flap. The weatherproof integrity 
shall not be affected when heavy duty specification or hospital grade 
attachment plug caps are inserted. Cover plates on outlet boxes mounted 
flush in the wall shall be gasketed to the wall in a watertight manner. 

2.2 TOGGLE SWITCHES 

A. Toggle switches shall be totally enclosed tumbler type with nylon 
bodies. Handles shall be ivory in color unless otherwise specified or 
shown on the drawings. 

1. Switches installed in hazardous areas shall be explosion-proof type 
in accordance with the NEC and as shown on the drawings. 

2. Shall be single unit toggle, butt contact, quiet AC type, heavy-duty 
general-purpose use with an integral self grounding mounting strap 
with break-off plasters ears and provisions for back wiring with 
separate metal wiring clamps and side wiring with captively held 
binding screws. 

3. Switches shall be rated 20 amperes at 120-277 Volts AC. 

2.3 MANUAL DIMMING CONTROL 

A. Electronic full-wave manual slide dimmer with on/off switch and audible 
frequency and EMI/RFI suppression filters. 

B. Manual dimming controls shall be fully compatible with fluorescent 
electronic dimming ballasts and approved by the ballast manufacturer, 
shall operate over full specified dimming range, and shall not degrade 
the performance or rated life of the electronic dimming ballast and 
lamp. 

C. Provide single-pole or three-way, as shown on the drawings. 

D. Manual dimming control and faceplates shall be ivory in color unless 
otherwise specified. 

2.4 WALL PLATES 

A. Wall plates for switches and receptacles shall be type smooth nylon. 
Oversize plates are not acceptable. 

B. Color shall be ivory unless otherwise specified. 

C. For receptacles or switches mounted adjacent to each other, wall plates 
shall be common for each group of receptacles or switches. 

D. In areas requiring tamperproof wiring devices, wall plates shall be 
type 302 stainless steel, and shall have tamperproof screws and beveled 
edges. 


E. Duplex Receptacles on Emergency Circuit: Wall plates shall be red nylon 
with the word "EMERGENCY" engraved in 6 mm (1/4 inch) white letters 

2.5 SURFACE MULTIPLE-OUTLET ASSEMBLIES 

A. Shall have the following features: 

1. Enclosures: 

a. Thickness of steel shall be not less than 1 mm (0.040 inch) for 
base and cover. Nominal dimensions shall be 40 mm x 70 mm (1-1/2 
inches by 2-3/4 inches) with inside cross sectional area not less 
than 2250 square mm (3-1/2 square inches). The enclosures shall 
be thoroughly cleaned, phosphatized, and painted at the factory 
with primer and the manufacturer's standard baked enamel finish. 

2. Receptacles shall be duplex. See paragraph 'RECEPTACLES' in this 
Section. Device cover plates shall be the manufacturer's standard 
corrosion resistant finish and shall not exceed the dimensions of 
the enclosure. 

3. Unless otherwise shown on drawings, receptacle spacing shall be 600 
mm (24 inches) on centers. 

4. Conductors shall be as specified in Section 26 05 19, LOW-VOLTAGE 
ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLE. 

5. Installation fittings shall be the manufacturer’s standard bends, 
offsets, device brackets, inside couplings, wire clips, elbows, and 
other components as required for a complete system. 

6. Bond the assemblies to the branch circuit conduit system. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Installation shall be in accordance with the NEC and as shown as on the 
drawings. 

B. Install wiring devices after wall construction and painting is 
complete. 

C. The ground terminal of each wiring device shall be bonded to the outlet 
box with an approved green bonding jumper, and also connected to the 
branch circuit equipment grounding conductor. 

D. Outlet boxes for toggle switches and manual dimming controls shall be 
mounted on the strike side of doors. 

E. Provide barriers in multigang outlet boxes to comply with the NEC. 

F. Coordinate the electrical work with the work of other trades to ensure 
that wiring device flush outlets are positioned with box openings aligned 
with the face of the surrounding finish material. Pay special attention 


to installations in cabinet work, and in connection with laboratory 
equipment. 

G. Exact field locations of floors, walls, partitions, doors, windows, and 
equipment may vary from locations shown on the drawings. Prior to 
locating sleeves, boxes and chases for roughing-in of conduit and 
equipment, the Contractor shall coordinate exact field location of the 
above items with other trades. 

H. Install wall switches 1.2 M (48 inches) above floor, with the toggle OFF 
position down. 

I. Install wall dimmers 1.2 M (48 inches) above floor. 

J. Install receptacles 450 mm (18 inches) above floor, and 152 mm (6 inches) 
above counter backsplash or workbenches. Install specific-use 
receptacles at heights shown on the drawings. 

K. Install vertically mounted receptacles with the ground pin up. Install 
horizontally mounted receptacles with the ground pin to the right. 

L. When required or recommended by the manufacturer, use a torque 
screwdriver. Tighten unused terminal screws. 

M. Label device plates with a permanent adhesive label listing panel and 
circuit feeding the wiring device. 

3.2 ACCEPTANCE CHECKS AND TESTS 

A. Perform manufacturer’s required field checks in accordance with the 
manufacturer's recommendations. In addition, include the following: 

1. Visual Inspection and Tests: 

a. Inspect physical and electrical condition. 

b. Vacuum-clean surface metal raceway interior. Clean metal raceway 
exterior. 

c. Test wiring devices for damaged conductors, high circuit 
resistance, poor connections, inadequate fault current path, 
defective devices, or similar problems using a portable 
receptacle tester. Correct circuit conditions, remove 
malfunctioning units and replace with new, and retest as 
specified above. 

d. Test GFCI receptacles. 

2. Healthcare Occupancy Tests: 

a. Test hospital grade receptacles for retention force per NFPA 99. 

---END--- 


SECTION 26 51 00 
INTERIOR LIGHTING 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION: 

A. This section specifies the furnishing, installation, and connection of 
the interior lighting systems. The terms “lighting fixture,” 
“fixture,” and “luminaire” are used interchangeably. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

 

A. Section 01 74 19, CONSTRUCTION WASTE MANAGEMENT: Disposal of lamps. 

B. Section 02 41 00, DEMOLITION: Removal and disposal of lamps and 
ballasts. 

E. Section 26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS: 
Requirements that apply to all sections of Division 26. 

F. Section 26 05 19, LOW-VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLES: 
Low-voltage conductors. 

G. Section 26 05 26, GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS: 
Requirements for personnel safety and to provide a low impedance path 
to ground for possible ground fault currents. 

H. Section 26 27 26, WIRING DEVICES: Wiring devices used for control of 
the lighting systems. 

1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. Refer to Paragraph, QUALIFICATIONS (PRODUCTS AND SERVICES), in Section 
26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit six copies of the following in accordance with Section 26 05 11, 
REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

1. Shop Drawings: 

a. Submit the following information for each type of lighting 
fixture designated on the LIGHTING FIXTURE SCHEDULE, arranged in 
order of lighting fixture designation. 

b. Material and construction details, include information on housing 
and optics system. 

c. Physical dimensions and description. 

d. Wiring schematic and connection diagram. 

e. Installation details. 

f. Energy efficiency data. 


g. Photometric data based on laboratory tests complying with IES 
Lighting Measurements testing and calculation guides. 

h. Lamp data including lumen output (initial and mean), color 
rendition index (CRI), rated life (hours), and color temperature 
(degrees Kelvin). 

i. Ballast data including ballast type, starting method, ambient 
temperature, ballast factor, sound rating, system watts, and 
total harmonic distortion (THD). 

j. For LED lighting fixtures, submit US DOE LED Lighting Facts 
label, and IES L70 rated life. 

2. Manuals: 

a. Submit, simultaneously with the shop drawings, complete 
maintenance and operating manuals, including technical data 
sheets, wiring diagrams, and information for ordering replacement 
parts. 

b. If changes have been made to the maintenance and operating 
manuals originally submitted, submit updated maintenance and 
operating manuals two weeks prior to the final inspection. 

3. Certifications: Two weeks prior to final inspection, submit the 
following. 

a. Certification by the Contractor that the interior lighting 
systems have been properly installed and tested. 

1.5 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below (including amendments, addenda, revisions, 
supplements, and errata) form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by 
designation only. 

B. American National Standards Institute (ANSI): 

C78.1-91................Fluorescent Lamps - Rapid-Start Types - 
Dimensional and Electrical Characteristics 

C78.376-01..............Chromaticity of Fluorescent Lamps 

C. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

C635-07.................Manufacture, Performance, and Testing of Metal 
Suspension Systems for Acoustical Tile and Layin 
Panel Ceilings 

D. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): 

40 CFR 261..............Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste 

E. Federal Communications Commission (FCC): 


CFR Title 47, Part 15...Radio Frequency Devices 

CFR Title 47, Part 18...Industrial, Scientific, and Medical Equipment 

F. Illuminating Engineering Society (IES): 

LM-79-08................Electrical and Photometric Measurements of 
Solid-State Lighting Products 

LM-80-08................Measuring Lumen Maintenance of LED Light 
Sources 

LM-82-12................Characterization of LED Light Engines and LED 
Lamps for Electrical and Photometric Properties 
as a Function of Temperature 

G. Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE): 

C62.41-91...............Surge Voltages in Low Voltage AC Power Circuits 

H. International Code Council (ICC): 

IBC-12..................International Building Code 

I. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

70-11...................National Electrical Code (NEC) 

101-12..................Life Safety Code 

J. National Electrical Manufacturer's Association (NEMA): 

C82.1-04................Lamp Ballasts – Line Frequency Fluorescent Lamp 
Ballasts 

C82.2-02................Method of Measurement of Fluorescent Lamp 
Ballasts 

C82.4-02................Lamp Ballasts - Ballasts for High-Intensity 
Discharge and Low-Pressure Sodium (LPS) Lamps 
(Multiple-Supply Type) 

C82.11-11...............Lamp Ballasts - High Frequency Fluorescent Lamp 
Ballasts 

LL-9-09.................Dimming of T8 Fluorescent Lighting Systems 

SSL-1-10................Electronic Drivers for LED Devices, Arrays, or 
Systems 

K. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

496-08..................Lampholders 

542-0599................Fluorescent Lamp Starters 

844-12..................Luminaires for Use in Hazardous (Classified) 
Locations 

924-12..................Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment 

935-01..................Fluorescent-Lamp Ballasts 

1029-94.................High-Intensity-Discharge Lamp Ballasts 


1029A-06................Ignitors and Related Auxiliaries for HID Lamp 
Ballasts 

1598-08.................Luminaires 

1574-04.................Track Lighting Systems 

2108-04.................Low-Voltage Lighting Systems 

8750-09.................Light Emitting Diode (LED) Light Sources for 
Use in Lighting Products 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 LIGHTING FIXTURES 

A. Shall be in accordance with NFPA, UL, as shown on drawings, and as 
specified. 

B. Sheet Metal: 

1. Shall be formed to prevent warping and sagging. Housing, trim and 
lens frame shall be true, straight (unless intentionally curved), 
and parallel to each other as designed. 

2. Wireways and fittings shall be free of burrs and sharp edges, and 
shall accommodate internal and branch circuit wiring without damage 
to the wiring. 

3. When installed, any exposed fixture housing surface, trim frame, 
door frame, and lens frame shall be free of light leaks. 

4. Hinged door frames shall operate smoothly without binding. Latches 
shall function easily by finger action without the use of tools. 

C. Ballasts and lamps shall be serviceable while the fixture is in its 
normally installed position. Ballasts shall not be mounted to 
removable reflectors or wireway covers unless so specified. 

D. Lamp Sockets: 

1. Fluorescent: Single slot entry type, requiring a one-quarter turn of 
the lamp after insertion. Lampholder contacts shall be the biting 
edge type. 

2. Compact Fluorescent: 4-pin. 

3. High Intensity Discharge (HID): Porcelain. 

E. Recessed fixtures mounted in an insulated ceiling shall be listed for 
use in insulated ceilings. 

F. Mechanical Safety: Lighting fixture closures (lens doors, trim frame, 
hinged housings, etc.) shall be retained in a secure manner by captive 
screws, chains, aircraft cable, captive hinges, or fasteners such that 
they cannot be accidentally dislodged during normal operation or 
routine maintenance. 


G. Metal Finishes: 

1. The manufacturer shall apply standard finish (unless otherwise 
specified) over a corrosion-resistant primer, after cleaning to free 
the metal surfaces of rust, grease, dirt and other deposits. Edges 
of pre-finished sheet metal exposed during forming, stamping or 
shearing processes shall be finished in a similar corrosion 
resistant manner to match the adjacent surface(s). Fixture finish 
shall be free of stains or evidence of rusting, blistering, or 
flaking, and shall be applied after fabrication. 

2. Interior light reflecting finishes shall be white with not less than 
85 percent reflectances, except where otherwise shown on the 
drawing. 

3. Exterior finishes shall be as shown on the drawings. 

H. Lighting fixtures shall have a specific means for grounding metallic 
wireways and housings to an equipment grounding conductor. 

I. Light Transmitting Components for Fluorescent Fixtures: 

1. Shall be 100 percent virgin acrylic. 

2. Flat lens panels shall have not less than 3 mm (1/8 inch) of average 
thickness. 

3. Unless otherwise specified, lenses, reflectors, diffusers, and 
louvers shall be retained firmly in a metal frame by clips or 
clamping ring in such a manner as to allow expansion and contraction 
without distortion or cracking. 

J. Lighting fixtures in hazardous areas shall be suitable for installation 
in Class and Division areas as defined in NFPA 70. 

K. Compact fluorescent fixtures shall be manufactured specifically for 
compact fluorescent lamps with ballast integral to the fixture. 
Assemblies designed to retrofit incandescent fixtures are prohibited 
except when specifically indicated for renovation of existing fixtures. 

2.2 BALLASTS 

A. Linear Fluorescent Lamp Ballasts: Multi-voltage (120 – 277V), 
electronic type, designed for type and quantity of lamps indicated. 
Ballasts shall be designed for full light output unless dimmer or bilevel 
control is indicated. Ballasts shall include the following 
features: 

1. Lamp end-of-life detection and shutdown circuit (T5 lamps only). 

2. Automatic lamp starting after lamp replacement. 

3. Sound Rating: Class A. 


4. Total Harmonic Distortion (THD): 10 percent or less. 

5. Transient Voltage Protection: IEEE C62.41.1 and IEEE C62.41.2, 
Category A or better. 

6. Operating Frequency: 20 kHz or higher. 

7. Lamp Current Crest Factor: 1.7 or less. 

8. Ballast Factor: 0.87 or higher unless otherwise indicated. 

9. Power Factor: 0.98 or higher. 

10. EMR/RFI Interference: Comply with CFR Title 47 Part 18 for 
limitations on electromagnetic and radio-frequency interference for 
non-consumer equipment. 

11. To facilitate multi-level lamp switching, lamps within fixture shall 
be wired with the outermost lamp at both sides of the fixture on the 
same ballast, the next inward pair on another ballast and so on to 
the innermost lamp (or pair of lamps). Within a given room, each 
switch shall uniformly control the same corresponding lamp (or lamp 
pairs) in all fixture units that are being controlled. 

12. Where three-lamp fixtures are indicated, unless switching 
arrangements dictate otherwise, utilize a common two-lamp ballast to 
operate the center lamp in pairs of adjacent units that are mounted 
in a continuous row. The ballast fixture and slave-lamp fixture 
shall be factory wired with leads or plug devices to facilitate this 
circuiting. Individually mounted fixtures and the odd fixture in a 
row shall utilize a single-lamp ballast for operation of the center 
lamp. 

13. Dimming ballasts shall be as per above, except dimmable from 100% to 
5% of rated lamp lumens. Dimming ballasts shall be fully compatible 
with the dimming controls. 

B. Low-Frequency Linear T8 Fluorescent Lamp Ballasts (allowed for Surgery 
Suites, Critical Care Units, and Animal Labs): Multi-voltage (120 – 
277V), hybrid electronic-electromagnetic rapid-start type, designed for 
type and quantity of lamps indicated. Ballast shall be designed for 
full light output. Ballasts shall include the following features: 

1. Automatic lamp starting after lamp replacement. 

2. Sound Rating: Class A. 

3. Total Harmonic Distortion (THD): 20 percent or less. 

4. Transient Voltage Protection: IEEE C62.41.1 and IEEE C62.41.2, 
Category A or better. 

5. Operating Frequency: 60 Hz. 


6. Lamp Current Crest Factor: 1.7 or less. 

7. Ballast Factor: 0.85 or higher unless otherwise indicated. 

8. Power Factor: 0.90 or higher. 

9. Interference: Comply with CFR Title 47 Part 18 for limitations on 
electromagnetic and radio-frequency interference for non-consumer 
equipment. 

10. To facilitate multi-level lamp switching, lamps within fixture shall 
be wired with the outermost lamp at both sides of the fixture on the 
same ballast, the next inward pair on another ballast and so on to 
the innermost lamp (or pair of lamps). Within a given room, each 
switch shall uniformly control the same corresponding lamp (or lamp 
pairs) in all fixture units that are being controlled. 

11. Where three-lamp fixtures are indicated, unless switching 
arrangements dictate otherwise, utilize a common two-lamp ballast to 
operate the center lamp in pairs of adjacent units that are mounted 
in a continuous row. The ballast fixture and slave-lamp fixture 
shall be factory wired with leads or plug devices to facilitate this 
circuiting. Individually mounted fixtures and the odd fixture in a 
row shall utilize a single-lamp ballast for operation of the center 
lamp. 

C. Compact Fluorescent Lamp Ballasts: Multi-voltage (120 – 277V), 
electronic programmed rapid-start type, designed for type and quantity 
of lamps indicated. Ballast shall be designed for full light output 
unless dimmer or bi-level control is indicated. Ballasts shall include 
the following features: 

1. Lamp end-of-life detection and shutdown circuit. 

2. Automatic lamp starting after lamp replacement. 

3. Sound Rating: Class A. 

4. Total Harmonic Distortion (THD): 10 percent or less. 

5. Transient Voltage Protection: IEEE C62.41.1 and IEEE C62.41.2, 
Category A or better. 

6. Operating Frequency: 20 kHz or higher. 

7. Lamp Current Crest Factor: 1.7 or less. 

8. Ballast Factor: 0.95 or higher unless otherwise indicated. 

9. Power Factor: 0.98 or higher. 

10. Interference: Comply with CFR Title 47 Part 18 for limitations on 
electromagnetic and radio-frequency interference for non-consumer 
equipment. 


11. Dimming ballasts shall be as per above, except dimmable from 100% to 
5% of rated lamp lumens. Dimming ballasts shall be fully compatible 
with the dimming controls. 

2.3 FLUORESCENT EMERGENCY BALLAST 

A. Self-contained, modular, battery-inverter unit, factory mounted within 
lighting fixture housing and compatible with ballast. 

1. Emergency Connection: Operate one fluorescent lamp(s) continuously 
at an output of 1100 lumens each. Connect unswitched circuit to 
battery-inverter unit and switched circuit to fixture ballast. 

2. Test Push Button and Indicator Light: Visible and accessible 
without opening fixture or entering ceiling space. 

a. Push Button: Push-to-test type, in unit housing, simulates loss 
of normal power and demonstrates unit operability. 

b. Indicator Light: LED indicates normal power on. Normal glow 
indicates trickle charge; bright glow indicates charging at end 
of discharge cycle. 

3. Battery: Sealed, maintenance-free, nickel-cadmium type. 

4. Charger: Fully automatic, solid-state, constant-current type with 
sealed power transfer relay. 

5. Integral Self-Test: Automatically initiates test of unit emergency 
operation at required intervals. Test failure is annunciated by an 
integral audible alarm and a flashing LED. 

2.4 LAMPS 

A. Linear and U-shaped T5 and T8 Fluorescent Lamps: 

1. Except as indicated below, lamps shall be low-mercury energy saving 
type, have a color temperature between 3500. and 4100.K, a Color 
Rendering Index (CRI) equal or greater than 80, average rated life 
equal to or greater than 24,000 hours when used with an instant 
start ballast and 30,000 hours when used with a programmed or rapid 
start ballast (based on 3 hour starts), and be suitable for use with 
dimming ballasts, unless otherwise indicated. 

a. Over the beds in Intensive Care, Coronary Care, Recovery, Life 
Support, and Observation and Treatment areas; Electromyographic, 
Autopsy (Necropsy), Surgery, and certain dental rooms 
(Examination, Oral Hygiene, Oral Surgery, Recovery, Labs, 
Treatment, and X-Ray) use color corrected lamps having a CRI of 
85 or above and a correlated color temperature between 5000 and 
6000.K, as shown on the drawings. 


b. Other areas as shown on the drawings. 

2. Lamps shall comply with EPA Toxicity Characteristic Leachate 
Procedure (TCLP) requirements. 

B. Compact Fluorescent Lamps: 

1. T4, CRI 80 (minimum), color temperature 3500.K, average rated life 
equal to or greater than 12,000 hours (based on 3 hour starts), and 
suitable for use with dimming ballasts, unless otherwise indicated. 

2. Lamps shall comply with EPA Toxicity Characteristic Leachate 
Procedure (TCLP) requirements. 

2.5 LED EXIT LIGHT FIXTURES 

A. Exit light fixtures shall meet applicable requirements of NFPA and UL. 

B. Housing and door shall be die-cast aluminum. 

C. For general purpose exit light fixtures, door frame shall be hinged, 
with latch. For vandal-resistant exit light fixtures, door frame shall 
be secured with tamper-resistant screws. 

D. Finish shall be satin or fine-grain brushed aluminum. 

E. There shall be no radioactive material used in the fixtures. 

F. Fixtures: 

1. Inscription panels shall be cast or stamped aluminum a minimum of 
2.25 mm (0.090 inch) thick, stenciled with 150 mm (6 inch) high 
letters, baked with red color stable plastic or fiberglass. Lamps 
shall be luminous Light Emitting Diodes (LED) mounted in center of 
letters on red color stable plastic or fiberglass. 

2. Double-Faced Fixtures: Provide double-faced fixtures where required 
or as shown on drawings. 

3. Directional Arrows: Provide directional arrows as part of the 
inscription panel where required or as shown on drawings. 
Directional arrows shall be the "chevron-type" of similar size and 
width as the letters and meet the requirements of NFPA 101. 

G. Voltage: Multi-voltage (120 – 277V). 

2.6 LED LIGHT FIXTURES 

A. General: 

1. LED light fixtures shall be in accordance with IES, NFPA, UL, as 
shown on the drawings, and as specified. 

2. LED light fixtures shall be Reduction of Hazardous Substances 
(RoHS)-compliant. 

3. LED drivers shall include the following features unless otherwise 
indicated: 


a. Minimum efficiency: 85% at full load. 

b. Minimum Operating Ambient Temperature: -20° C. (-4° F.) 

c. Input Voltage: 120 - 277V (±10%) at 60 Hz. 

d. Integral short circuit, open circuit, and overload protection. 

e. Power Factor: = 0.95. 

f. Total Harmonic Distortion: = 20%. 

g. Comply with FCC 47 CFR Part 15. 

4. LED modules shall include the following features unless otherwise 
indicated: 

a. Comply with IES LM-79 and LM-80 requirements. 

b. Minimum CRI 80 and color temperature 3000° K unless otherwise 
specified in LIGHTING FIXTURE SCHEDULE. 

c. Minimum Rated Life: 50,000 hours per IES L70. 

d. Light output lumens as indicated in the LIGHTING FIXTURE 
SCHEDULE. 

B. LED Downlights: 

1. Housing, LED driver, and LED module shall be products of the same 
manufacturer. 

C. LED Troffers: 

1. LED drivers, modules, and reflector shall be accessible, 
serviceable, and replaceable from below the ceiling. 

2. Housing, LED driver, and LED module shall be products of the same 
manufacturer. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Installation shall be in accordance with the NEC, manufacturer's 
instructions, and as shown on the drawings or specified. 

B. Align, mount, and level the lighting fixtures uniformly. 

C. Wall-mounted fixtures shall be attached to the studs in the walls, or 
to a 20 gauge metal backing plate that is attached to the studs in the 
walls. Lighting fixtures shall not be attached directly to gypsum 
board. 

D. Lighting Fixture Supports: 

1. Shall provide support for all of the fixtures. Supports may be 
anchored to channels of the ceiling construction, to the structural 
slab or to structural members within a partition, or above a 
suspended ceiling. 

2. Shall maintain the fixture positions after cleaning and relamping. 


3. Shall support the lighting fixtures without causing the ceiling or 
partition to deflect. 

4. Hardware for recessed lighting fixtures: 

a. All fixture mounting devices connecting fixtures to the ceiling 
system or building structure shall have a capacity for a 
horizontal force of 100 percent of the fixture weight and a 
vertical force of 400 percent of the fixture weight. 

b. Mounting devices shall clamp the fixture to the ceiling system 
structure (main grid runners or fixture framing cross runners) at 
four points in such a manner as to resist spreading of these 
supporting members. Each support point device shall utilize a 
screw or approved hardware to "lock" the fixture housing to the 
ceiling system, restraining the fixture from movement in any 
direction relative to the ceiling. The screw (size No. 10 
minimum) or approved hardware shall pass through the ceiling 
member (T-bar, channel or spline), or it may extend over the 
inside of the flange of the channel (or spline) that faces away 
from the fixture, in a manner that prevents any fixture movement. 

c. In addition to the above, the following is required for fixtures 
exceeding 9 kg (20 pounds) in weight. 

1) Where fixtures mounted in ASTM Standard C635 "Intermediate 
Duty" and "Heavy Duty" ceilings and weigh between 9 kg and 25 
kg (20 pounds and 56 pounds), provide two 12 gauge safety 
hangers hung slack between diagonal corners of the fixture and 
the building structure. 

2) Where fixtures weigh over 25 kg (56 pounds), they shall be 
independently supported from the building structure by 
approved hangers. Two-way angular bracing of hangers shall be 
provided to prevent lateral motion. 

d. Where ceiling cross runners are installed for support of lighting 
fixtures, they must have a carrying capacity equal to that of the 
main ceiling runners and be rigidly secured to the main runners. 

7. Surface mounted lighting fixtures: 

a. Fixtures shall be bolted against the ceiling independent of the 
outlet box at four points spaced near the corners of each unit. 
The bolts (or stud-clips) shall be minimum 6 mm (1/4 inch) bolt, 
secured to main ceiling runners and/or secured to cross runners. 
Non-turning studs may be attached to the main ceiling runners and 


cross runners with special non-friction clip devices designed for 
the purpose, provided they bolt through the runner, or are also 
secured to the building structure by 12 gauge safety hangers. 
Studs or bolts securing fixtures weighing in excess of 25 kg (56 
pounds) shall be supported directly from the building structure. 

b. Where ceiling cross runners are installed for support of lighting 
fixtures, they must have a carrying capacity equal to that of the 
main ceiling runners and be rigidly secured to the main runners. 

c. Fixtures less than 6.8 kg (15 pounds) in weight and occupying 
less than 3715 sq cm (two square feet) of ceiling area may, when 
designed for the purpose, be supported directly from the outlet 
box when all the following conditions are met. 

1) Screws attaching the fixture to the outlet box pass through 
round holes (not key-hole slots) in the fixture body. 

2) The outlet box is attached to a main ceiling runner (or cross 
runner) with approved hardware. 

3) The outlet box is supported vertically from the building 
structure. 

d. Fixtures mounted in open construction shall be secured directly 
to the building structure with approved bolting and clamping 
devices. 

8. Single or double pendant-mounted lighting fixtures: 

a. Each stem shall be supported by an approved outlet box mounted 
swivel joint and canopy which holds the stem captive and provides 
spring load (or approved equivalent) dampening of fixture 
oscillations. Outlet box shall be supported vertically from the 
building structure. 

9. Outlet boxes for support of lighting fixtures (where permitted) 
shall be secured directly to the building structure with approved 
devices or supported vertically in a hung ceiling from the building 
structure with a nine gauge wire hanger, and be secured by an 
approved device to a main ceiling runner or cross runner to prevent 
any horizontal movement relative to the ceiling. 

E. Furnish and install the new lamps as specified for all lighting 
fixtures installed under this project, and for all existing lighting 
fixtures reused under this project. 

F. The electrical and ceiling trades shall coordinate to ascertain that 
approved lighting fixtures are furnished in the proper sizes and 


installed with the proper devices (hangers, clips, trim frames, 
flanges, etc.), to match the ceiling system being installed. 

G. Bond lighting fixtures to the grounding system as specified in Section 
26 05 26, GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS. 

H. At completion of project, replace all defective components of the 
lighting fixtures at no cost to the Government. 

I. Dispose of lamps per requirements of Section 01 74 19, CONSTRUCTION 
WASTE MANAGEMENT, and Section 02 41 00, DEMOLITION. 

3.2 ACCEPTANCE CHECKS AND TESTS 

A. Perform the following: 

1. Visual Inspection: 

a. Verify proper operation by operating the lighting controls. 

b. Visually inspect for damage to fixtures, lenses, reflectors, 
diffusers, and louvers. Clean fixtures, lenses, reflectors, 
diffusers, and louvers that have accumulated dust, dirt, or 
fingerprints during construction. 

2. Electrical tests: 

a. Exercise dimming components of the lighting fixtures over full 
range of dimming capability by operating the control devices(s) 
in the presence of the COTR. Observe for visually detectable 
flicker over full dimming range, and replace defective components 
at no cost to the Government. 

b. Burn-in all lamps that require specific aging period to operate 
properly, prior to occupancy by Government. Burn-in period to be 
40 hours minimum, unless specifically recommended otherwise by 
the lamp manufacturer. Burn-in dimmed fluorescent and compact 
fluorescent lamps for at least 100 hours at full voltage, unless 
specifically recommended otherwise by the lamp manufacturer. 
Replace any lamps and ballasts which fail during burn-in. 

3.3 FOLLOW-UP VERIFICATION 

A. Upon completion of acceptance checks and tests, the Contractor shall 
show by demonstration in service that the lighting systems are in good 
operating condition and properly performing the intended function. 

---END--- 


SECTION 27 05 11 
REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMUNICATIONS INSTALLATIONS 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This Section, Requirements for Communications Installations, applies to 
all sections of Division 27. 

B. Furnish and install communications cabling, systems, equipment, and 
accessories in accordance with the specifications and drawings. 
Capacities and ratings of transformers, cable, and other items and 
arrangements for the specified items are shown on drawings. 

1.2 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 

A. References to industry and trade association standards and codes are 
minimum installation requirement standards. 

B. Drawings and other specification sections shall govern in those 
instances where requirements are greater than those specified in the 
above standards. 

1.3 QUALIFICATIONS (PRODUCTS AND SERVICES) 

A. Manufacturers Qualifications: The manufacturer shall regularly and 
presently produce, as one of the manufacturer's principal products, the 
equipment and material specified for this project, and shall have 
manufactured the item for at least three years. 

B. Product Qualification: 

1. Manufacturer's product shall have been in satisfactory operation, on 
three installations of similar size and type as this project, for 
approximately three years. 

2. The Government reserves the right to require the Contractor to submit 
a list of installations where the products have been in operation 
before approval. 

C. Service Qualifications: There shall be a permanent service organization 
maintained or trained by the manufacturer which will render satisfactory 
service to this installation within four hours of receipt of 
notification that service is needed. Submit name and address of service 
organizations. 

1.4 MANUFACTURED PRODUCTS 

A. Materials and equipment furnished shall be of current production by 
manufacturers regularly engaged in the manufacture of such items, for 
which replacement parts shall be available. 

B. When more than one unit of the same class of equipment is required, such 
units shall be the product of a single manufacturer. 

C. Equipment Assemblies and Components: 


1. Components of an assembled unit need not be products of the same 
manufacturer. 

2. Manufacturers of equipment assemblies, which include components made 
by others, shall assume complete responsibility for the final 
assembled unit. 

3. Components shall be compatible with each other and with the total 
assembly for the intended service. 

4. Constituent parts which are similar shall be the product of a single 
manufacturer. 

D. Factory wiring shall be identified on the equipment being furnished and 
on all wiring diagrams. 

E. When Factory Testing Is Specified: 

1. The Government shall have the option of witnessing factory tests. The 
contractor shall notify the VA through the Resident Engineer a 
minimum of 15 working days prior to the manufacturers making the 
factory tests. 

2. Four copies of certified test reports containing all test data shall 
be furnished to the Resident Engineer prior to final inspection and 
not more than 90 days after completion of the tests. 

3. When equipment fails to meet factory test and re-inspection is 
required, the contractor shall be liable for all additional expenses, 
including expenses of the Government. 

1.5 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS 

 Where variations from the contract requirements are requested in 
accordance with the GENERAL CONDITIONS and Section 01 33 23, SHOP 
DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES, the connecting work and related 
components shall include, but not be limited to additions or changes to 
branch circuits, circuit protective devices, conduits, wire, feeders, 
controls, panels and installation methods. 

1.6 EQUIPMENT PROTECTION 

A. Equipment and materials shall be protected during shipment and storage 
against physical damage, dirt, moisture, cold and rain: 

1. During installation, enclosures, equipment, controls, controllers, 
circuit protective devices, and other like items, shall be protected 
against entry of foreign matter; and be vacuum cleaned both inside 
and outside before testing and operating and repainting if required. 

2. Damaged equipment shall be, as determined by the Resident Engineer, 
placed in first class operating condition or be returned to the 
source of supply for repair or replacement. 

3. Painted surfaces shall be protected with factory installed removable 
heavy kraft paper, sheet vinyl or equal. 


4. Damaged paint on equipment and materials shall be refinished with the 
same quality of paint and workmanship as used by the manufacturer so 
repaired areas are not obvious. 

1.7 WORK PERFORMANCE 

A. Job site safety and worker safety is the responsibility of the 
contractor. 

B. For work on existing stations, arrange, phase and perform work to assure 
communications service for other buildings at all times. Refer to 
Article OPERATIONS AND STORAGE AREAS under Section 01 00 00, GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS. 

C. New work shall be installed and connected to existing work neatly and 
carefully. Disturbed or damaged work shall be replaced or repaired to 
its prior conditions, as required by Section 01 00 00, GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS. 

D. Coordinate location of equipment and pathways with other trades to 
minimize interferences. See the GENERAL CONDITIONS. 

1.8 EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION AND REQUIREMENTS 

A. Equipment location shall be as close as practical to locations shown on 
the drawings. 

B. Inaccessible Equipment: 

1. Where the Government determines that the Contractor has installed 
equipment not conveniently accessible for operation and maintenance, 
the equipment shall be removed and reinstalled as directed at no 
additional cost to the Government. 

2. "Conveniently accessible" is defined as being capable of being 
reached without the use of ladders, or without climbing or crawling 
under or over obstacles such as, but not limited to, motors, pumps, 
belt guards, transformers, piping, ductwork, conduit and raceways. 

1.9 EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 

A. Install an identification sign which clearly indicates information 
required for use and maintenance of equipment. 

B. Nameplates shall be laminated black phenolic resin with a white core 
with engraved lettering, a minimum of 6 mm (1/4 inch) high. Secure 
nameplates with screws. Nameplates that are furnished by manufacturer as 
a standard catalog item, or where other method of identification is 
herein specified, are exceptions. 

1.10 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 


B. The Government's approval shall be obtained for all equipment and 
material before delivery to the job site. Delivery, storage, or 
installation of equipment or material which has not had prior approval 
will not be permitted at the job site. 

C. All submittals shall include adequate descriptive literature, catalog 
cuts, shop drawings, and other data necessary for the Government to 
ascertain that the proposed equipment and materials comply with 
specification requirements. Catalog cuts submitted for approval shall 
be legible and clearly identify equipment being submitted. 

D. Submittals for individual systems and equipment assemblies which consist 
of more than one item or component shall be made for the system or 
assembly as a whole. Partial submittals will not be considered for 
approval. 

1. Mark the submittals, "SUBMITTED UNDER SECTION__________________". 

2. Submittals shall be marked to show specification reference including 
the section and paragraph numbers. 

3. Submit each section separately. 

E. The submittals shall include the following: 

1. Information that confirms compliance with contract requirements. 
Include the manufacturer's name, model or catalog numbers, catalog 
information, technical data sheets, shop drawings, pictures, 
nameplate data and test reports as required. 

2. Submittals are required for all equipment anchors and supports. 
Submittals shall include weights, dimensions, center of gravity, 
standard connections, manufacturer's recommendations and behavior 
problems (e.g., vibration, thermal expansion,) associated with 
equipment or piping so that the proposed installation can be properly 
reviewed. 

3. Elementary and interconnection wiring diagrams for communication and 
signal systems, control system and equipment assemblies. All terminal 
points and wiring shall be identified on wiring diagrams. 

4. Parts list which shall include those replacement parts recommended by 
the equipment manufacturer, quantity of parts, current price and 
availability of each part. 

F. Manuals: Submit in accordance with Section 01 00 00, GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS. 

1. Maintenance and Operation Manuals: Submit as required for systems and 
equipment specified in the technical sections. Furnish four copies, 
bound in hardback binders, (manufacturer's standard binders) or an 
approved equivalent. Furnish one complete manual as specified in the 
technical section but in no case later than prior to performance of 


systems or equipment test, and furnish the remaining manuals prior to 
contract completion. 

2. Inscribe the following identification on the cover: the words 
"MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION MANUAL," the name and location of the 
system, equipment, building, name of Contractor, and contract number. 
Include in the manual the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of 
each subcontractor installing the system or equipment and the local 
representatives for the system or equipment. 

3. Provide a "Table of Contents" and assemble the manual to conform to 
the table of contents, with tab sheets placed before instructions 
covering the subject. The instructions shall be legible and easily 
read, with large sheets of drawings folded in. 

4. The manuals shall include: 

a. Internal and interconnecting wiring and control diagrams with data 
to explain detailed operation and control of the equipment. 

b. A control sequence describing start-up, operation, and shutdown. 

c. Description of the function of each principal item of equipment. 

d. Installation and maintenance instructions. 

e. Safety precautions. 

f. Diagrams and illustrations. 

g. Testing methods. 

h. Performance data. 

i. Pictorial "exploded" parts list with part numbers. Emphasis shall 
be placed on the use of special tools and instruments. The list 
shall indicate sources of supply, recommended spare parts, and 
name of servicing organization. 

j. Appendix; list qualified permanent servicing organizations for 
support of the equipment, including addresses and certified 
qualifications. 

G. Approvals will be based on complete submission of manuals together with 
shop drawings. 

H. After approval and prior to installation, furnish the Resident Engineer 
with one sample of each of the following: 

1. A 300 mm (12 inch) length of each type and size of wire and cable 
along with the tag from the coils of reels from which the samples 
were taken. 

2. Each type of conduit and pathway coupling, bushing and termination 
fitting. 

3. Raceway and pathway hangers, clamps and supports. 

4. Duct sealing compound. 

 


I. In addition to the requirement of SUBMITTALS, the VA reserves the right 
to request the manufacturer to arrange for a VA representative to see 
typical active systems in operation, when there has been no prior 
experience with the manufacturer or the type of equipment being 
submitted. 

1.11 SINGULAR NUMBER 

 Where any device or part of equipment is referred to in these 
specifications in the singular number (e.g., "the switch"), this 
reference shall be deemed to apply to as many such devices as are 
required to complete the installation as shown on the drawings. 

 

1.12 TRAINING 

A. Training shall be provided in accordance with Article, INSTRUCTIONS, of 
Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

B. Training shall be provided for the particular equipment or system as 
required in each associated specification. 

C. A training schedule shall be developed and submitted by the contractor 
and approved by the Resident Engineer at least 30 days prior to the 
planned training. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 27 05 26 
GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies general grounding and bonding requirements of 
telecommunication installations for equipment operations. 

B. “Grounding electrode system” refers to all electrodes required by NEC, 
as well as including made, supplementary, telecommunications system 
grounding electrodes. 

C. The terms “connect” and “bond” are used interchangeably in this 
specification and have the same meaning. 


1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 27 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMUNICATIONS INSTALLATIONS: 
General electrical requirements and items that are common to more than 
one section of Division 27. 

B. Section 27 10 00, STRUCTURED CABLING: Low Voltage power and lighting 
wiring. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 27 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR 
COMMUNICATIONS INSTALLATIONS. 

B. Shop Drawings: 

1. Sufficient information, clearly presented, shall be included to 
determine compliance with drawings and specifications. 

2. Include the location of system grounding electrode connections and 
the routing of aboveground and underground grounding electrode 
conductors. 

C. Test Reports: Provide certified test reports of ground resistance. 

D. Certifications: Two weeks prior to final inspection, submit four copies 
of the following to the Resident Engineer: 

1. Certification that the materials and installation is in accordance 
with the drawings and specifications. 

2. Certification, by the Contractor, that the complete installation has 
been properly installed and tested. 

1.4 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

 Publications listed below (including amendments, addenda, revisions, 
supplements, and errata) form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by the basic 
designation only. 


A. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

B1-2001.................Standard Specification for Hard-Drawn Copper 
Wire 

B8-2004.................Standard Specification for Concentric-Lay- 
Stranded Copper Conductors, Hard, Medium-Hard, 
or Soft 

B. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE): 

81-1983.................IEEE Guide for Measuring Earth Resistivity, 
Ground Impedance, and Earth Surface Potentials 
of a Ground System 

C. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

70-2005.................National Electrical Code (NEC) 

D. Telecommunications Industry Association, (TIA) 


J-STO-607-A-2002........Commercial Building Grounding (Earthing) and 
Bonding Requirements for Telecommunications 

E. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

44-2005 ................Thermoset-Insulated Wires and Cables 

83-2003 ................Thermoplastic-Insulated Wires and Cables 

467-2004 ...............Grounding and Bonding Equipment 

486A-486B-2003 .........Wire Connectors 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 GROUNDING AND BONDING CONDUCTORS 

A. Equipment grounding conductors shall be UL 83 insulated stranded 
copper, except that sizes 6 mm² (10 AWG) and smaller shall be solid 
copper. Insulation color shall be continuous green for all equipment 
grounding conductors, except that wire sizes 25 mm² (4 AWG) and larger 
shall be permitted to be identified per NEC. 

B. Bonding conductors shall be ASTM B8 bare stranded copper, except that 
sizes 6 mm² (10 AWG) and smaller shall be ASTM B1 solid bare copper 
wire. 

C. Isolated Power System: Type XHHW-2 insulation with a dielectric 
constant of 3.5 or less. 

D. Telecom System Grounding Riser Conductor: Telecommunications Grounding 
Riser shall be in accordance with J STO-607A. Use a minimum 50mm² (1/0 
AWG) insulated stranded copper grounding conductor unless indicated 
otherwise. 


 


2.2 SPLICES AND TERMINATION COMPONENTS 

 Components shall meet or exceed UL 467 and be clearly marked with the 
manufacturer, catalog number, and permitted conductor size(s). 

2.3 GROUND CONNECTIONS 

A. Below Grade: Exothermic-welded type connectors. 

B. Above Grade: 

1. Bonding Jumpers: compression type connectors, using zinc-plated 
fasteners and external tooth lockwashers. 

2. Ground Busbars: Two-hole compression type lugs using tin-plated 
copper or copper alloy bolts and nuts. 

3. Rack and Cabinet Ground Bars: one-hole compression-type lugs using 
zinc-plated or copper alloy fasteners. 

A. Cable Shields: Make ground connections to multipair communications 
cables with metallic shields using shield bonding connectors with screw 
stud connection. 


2.4 GROUND TERMINAL BLOCKS 

 At any equipment mounting location (e.g. backboards and hinged cover 
enclosures) where rack-type ground bars cannot be mounted, provide 
screw lug-type terminal blocks. 

2.5 SPLICE CASE GROUND ACCESSORIES 

 Splice case grounding and bonding accessories shall be supplied by the 
splice case manufacturer when available. Otherwise, use 16 mm² (6 AWG) 
insulated ground wire with shield bonding connectors. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 GENERAL 

A. Ground in accordance with the NEC, as shown on drawings, and as 
hereinafter specified. 

B. System Grounding: 

1. Secondary service neutrals: Ground at the supply side of the 
secondary disconnecting means and at the related transformers. 

2. Separately derived systems (transformers downstream from the service 
entrance): Ground the secondary neutral. 

3. Isolation transformers and isolated power systems shall not be 
system grounded. 

C. Equipment Grounding: Metallic structures (including ductwork and 
building steel), enclosures, raceways, junction boxes, outlet boxes, 
cabinets, machine frames, and other conductive items in close proximity 
with electrical circuits shall be bonded and grounded. 


SPEC WRITER NOTE: If appropriate for 
project, include details involving 
grounding for patient equipment and areas 
on plans. Standard Details may be 
obtained at 
http://www.va/gov/facmgt/standard/details 
-elec.asp. 

 

3.2 INACCESSIBLE GROUNDING CONNECTIONS 

 Make grounding connections, which are buried or otherwise normally 
inaccessible (except connections for which periodic testing access is 
required) by exothermic weld. 

3.3 SECONDARY EQUIPMENT AND CIRCUITS 

A. Main Bonding Jumper: Bond the secondary service neutral to the ground 
bus in the service equipment. 

B. Metallic Piping, Building Steel, and Supplemental Electrode(s): 

1. Provide a grounding electrode conductor sized per NEC between the 
service equipment ground bus and all metallic water and gas pipe 
systems, building steel, and supplemental or made electrodes. Jumper 
insulating joints in the metallic piping. All connections to 
electrodes shall be made with fittings that conform to UL 467. 

2. Provide a supplemental ground electrode and bond to the grounding 
electrode system. 

F. Conduit Systems: 

1. Ground all metallic conduit systems. All metallic conduit systems 
shall contain an equipment grounding conductor. 

2. Non-metallic conduit systems shall contain an equipment grounding 
conductor, except that non-metallic feeder conduits which carry a 
grounded conductor from exterior transformers to interior or 
building-mounted service entrance equipment need not contain an 
equipment grounding conductor. 

3. Conduit containing only a grounding conductor, and which is provided 
for mechanical protection of the conductor, shall be bonded to that 
conductor at the entrance and exit from the conduit. 

G. Feeders and Branch Circuits: Install equipment grounding conductors 
with all feeders and power and lighting branch circuits. 

H. Boxes, Cabinets, Enclosures, and Panelboards: 

1. Bond the equipment grounding conductor to each pullbox, junction 
box, outlet box, device box, cabinets, and other enclosures through 
which the conductor passes (except for special grounding systems for 
intensive care units and other critical units shown). 


2. Provide lugs in each box and enclosure for equipment grounding 
conductor termination. 

3. Provide ground bars in panelboards, bolted to the housing, with 
sufficient lugs to terminate the equipment grounding conductors. 

J. Receptacles shall not be grounded through their mounting screws. Ground 
with a jumper from the receptacle green ground terminal to the device 
box ground screw and the branch circuit equipment grounding conductor. 

M. Raised Floors: Provide bonding of all raised floor components. //See 
details on the drawings. // 

3.4 CORROSION INHIBITORS 

 When making ground and ground bonding connections, apply a corrosion 
inhibitor to all contact surfaces. Use corrosion inhibitor appropriate 
for protecting a connection between the metals used. 

3.5 CONDUCTIVE PIPING 

A. Bond all conductive piping systems, interior and exterior, to the 
building to the grounding electrode system. Bonding connections shall 
be made as close as practical to the equipment ground bus. 

B. In operating rooms and at intensive care and coronary care type beds, 
bond the gases and suction piping, at the outlets, directly to the room 
or patient ground bus. 

3.6 TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM 

A. Bond telecommunications system grounding equipment to the electrical 
grounding electrode system. 
B. Furnish and install all wire and hardware required to properly ground, 
bond and connect communications raceway, cable tray, metallic cable 
shields, and equipment to a ground source. 
C. Ground bonding jumpers shall be continuous with no splices. Use the 
shortest length of bonding jumper possible. 
D. Provide ground paths that are permanent and continuous with a 
resistance of 1 ohm or less from raceway, cable tray, and equipment 
connections to the building grounding electrode. The resistance across 
individual bonding connections shall be 10 milli ohms or less. 
E. Above-Grade Grounding Connections: When making bolted or screwed 
connections to attach bonding jumpers, remove paint to expose the 
entire contact surface by grinding where necessary; thoroughly clean 
all connector, plate and other contact surfaces; and apply an 
appropriate corrosion inhibitor to all surfaces before joining. 
F. Bonding Jumpers: 



1. Use insulated ground wire of the size and type shown on the 
Drawings or use a minimum of 16 mm² (6 AWG) insulated copper 
wire. 
2. Assemble bonding jumpers using insulated ground wire terminated 
with compression connectors. 
3. Use compression connectors of proper size for conductors 
specified. Use connector manufacturer’s compression tool. 


H. Bonding Jumper Fasteners: 

1. Conduit: Fasten bonding jumpers using screw lugs on grounding 
bushings or conduit strut clamps, or the clamp pads on push-type 
conduit fasteners. When screw lug connection to a conduit strut 
clamp is not possible, fasten the plain end of a bonding jumper wire 
by slipping the plain end under the conduit strut clamp pad; tighten 
the clamp screw firmly. Where appropriate, use zinc-plated external 
tooth lockwashers. 

2. Wireway and Cable Tray: Fasten bonding jumpers using zinc-plated 
bolts, external tooth lockwashers, and nuts. Install protective 
cover, e.g., zinc-plated acorn nuts on any bolts extending into 
wireway or cable tray to prevent cable damage. 

3. Ground Plates and Busbars: Fasten bonding jumpers using two-hole 
compression lugs. Use tin-plated copper or copper alloy bolts, 
external tooth lockwashers, and nuts. 

4. Unistrut and Raised Floor Stringers: Fasten bonding jumpers using 
zinc-plated, self-drill screws and external tooth lockwashers. 

3.7 COMMUNICATION ROOM GROUNDING 

A. Telecommunications Ground Busbars: 

1. Provide communications room telecommunications ground busbar 
hardware at 950 mm (18 inches) at locations indicated on the 
Drawings. 

2. Connect the telecommunications room ground busbars to other room 
grounding busbars as indicated on the Grounding Riser diagram. 

B. Telephone-Type Cable Rack Systems: aluminum pan installed on telephonetype 
cable rack serves as the primary ground conductor within the 
communications room. Make ground connections by installing the 
following bonding jumpers: 

1. Install a 16 mm² (6 AWG) bonding between the telecommunications 
ground busbar and the nearest access to the aluminum pan installed 
on the cable rack. 



2. Use 16 mm² (6 AWG) bonding jumpers across aluminum pan junctions. 


C. Self-Supporting and Cabinet-Mounted Equipment Rack Ground Bars: 

1. When ground bars are provided at the rear of lineup of bolted 
together equipment racks, bond the copper ground bars together using 
solid copper splice plates supplied by the ground bar manufacturer. 
2. Bond together nonadjacent ground bars on equipment racks and 
cabinets with 16 mm² (6 AWG) insulated copper wire bonding jumpers 
attached at each end with compression-type connectors and mounting 
bolts. 
3. Provide a 16 mm² (6 AWG) bonding jumper between the rack and/or 
cabinet ground busbar and the aluminum pan of an overhead cable tray 
or the raised floor stringer as appropriate. 


D. Backboards: Provide a screw lug-type terminal block or drilled and 
tapped copper strip near the top of backboards used for communications 
cross-connect systems. Connect backboard ground terminals to the 
aluminum pan in the telephone-type cable tray using an insulated 16 mm² 
(16 AWG) bonding jumper. 

E. Other Communication Room Ground Systems: Ground all metallic conduit, 
wireways, and other metallic equipment located away from equipment 
racks or cabinets to the cable tray pan or the telecommunications 
ground busbar, whichever is closer, using insulated 16 mm² (6 AWG) 
ground wire bonding jumpers. 

3.8 COMMUNICATIONS CABLE GROUNDING 

A. Bond all metallic cable sheaths in multipair communications cables 
together at each splicing and/or terminating location to provide 100 
percent metallic sheath continuity throughout the communications 
distribution system. 

1. At terminal points, install a cable shield bonding connector provide 
a screw stud connection for ground wire. Use a bonding jumper to 
connect the cable shield connector to an appropriate ground source 
like the rack or cabinet ground bar. 

2. Bond all metallic cable shields together within splice closures 
using cable shield bonding connectors or the splice case grounding 
and bonding accessories provided by the splice case manufacturer. 
When an external ground connection is provided as part of splice 
closure, connect to an approved ground source and all other metallic 
components and equipment at that location. 


3.10 COMMUNCIATIONS RACEWAY GROUNDING 

A. Conduit: Use insulated 16 mm² (6 AWG) bonding jumpers to ground 
metallic conduit at each end and to bond at all intermediate metallic 
enclosures. 
B. Wireway: use insulated 16 mm² (6 AWG) bonding jumpers to ground or bond 
metallic wireway at each end at all intermediate metallic enclosures 
and across all section junctions. 
C. Cable Tray Systems: Use insulated 16 mm² (6 AWG) bonding jumpers to 
ground cable tray to column-mounted building ground plates (pads) at 
each end and approximately every 16 meters (50 feet). 




3.11 GROUND RESISTANCE 

A. Grounding system resistance to ground shall not exceed 5 ohms. Make 
necessary modifications or additions to the grounding electrode system 
for compliance without additional cost to the Government. Final tests 
shall assure that this requirement is met. 

B. Resistance of the grounding electrode system shall be measured using a 
four-terminal fall-of-potential method as defined in IEEE 81. Ground 
resistance measurements shall be made before the electrical 
distribution system is energized and shall be made in normally dry 
conditions not less than 48 hours after the last rainfall. Resistance 
measurements of separate grounding electrode systems shall be made 
before the systems are bonded together below grade. The combined 
resistance of separate systems may be used to meet the required 
resistance, but the specified number of electrodes must still be 
provided. 

C. Services at power company interface points shall comply with the power 
company ground resistance requirements. 

D. Below-grade connections shall be visually inspected by the Resident 
Engineer prior to backfilling. The Contractor shall notify the Resident 
Engineer 24 hours before the connections are ready for inspection. 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


 SECTION 27 05 33 
RACEWAYS AND BOXES FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section specifies the furnishing, installation, and connection of 
conduit, fittings, and boxes to form complete, coordinated, raceway 
systems. Raceways are required for all communications cabling unless 
shown or specified otherwise. 

B. Definitions: The term conduit, as used in this specification, shall mean 
any or all of the raceway types specified. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Bedding of conduits: Section 31 20 00, EARTH MOVING. 

B. Mounting board for communication closets: Section 06 10 00, ROUGH 
CARPENTRY. 

C. Sealing around penetrations to maintain the integrity of fire rated 
construction: Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

D. Fabrications for the deflection of water away from the building envelope 
at penetrations: Section 07 60 00, FLASHING AND SHEET METAL. 

E. Sealing around conduit penetrations through the building envelope to 
prevent moisture migration into the building: Section 07 92 00, JOINT 
SEALANTS. 

F. Identification and painting of conduit and other devices: Section 09 91 
00, PAINTING. 

G. General electrical requirements and items that is common to more than 
one section of Division 27: Section 27 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR 
COMMUNICATIONS INSTALLATIONS. 

H. Requirements for personnel safety and to provide a low impedance path 
for possible ground fault currents: Section 27 05 26, GROUNDING AND 
BONDING FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS. 

1.3 SUBMITTALS 

 In accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND 
SAMPLES, furnish the following: 

A. Shop Drawings: 

1. Size and location of panels and pull boxes 

2. Layout of required conduit penetrations through structural elements. 

3. The specific item proposed and its area of application shall be 
identified on the catalog cuts. 

B. Certification: Prior to final inspection, deliver to the COTR four 
copies of the certification that the material is in accordance with the 
drawings and specifications and has been properly installed. 


1.4 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. Publications listed below (including amendments, addenda, revisions, 
supplements and errata) form a part of this specification to the extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in the text by the basic 
designation only. 

B. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

70-05...................National Electrical Code (NEC) 

C. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

1-03....................Flexible Metal Conduit 

5-01....................Surface Metal Raceway and Fittings 

6-03....................Rigid Metal Conduit 

50-03...................Enclosures for Electrical Equipment 

360-03..................Liquid-Tight Flexible Steel Conduit 

467-01..................Grounding and Bonding Equipment 

514A-01.................Metallic Outlet Boxes 

514B-02.................Fittings for Cable and Conduit 

514C-05.................Nonmetallic Outlet Boxes, Flush-Device Boxes and 
Covers 

651-02..................Schedule 40 and 80 Rigid PVC Conduit 

651A-03.................Type EB and A Rigid PVC Conduit and HDPE Conduit 

797-03..................Electrical Metallic Tubing 

1242-00.................Intermediate Metal Conduit 

D. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA): 

TC-3-04.................PVC Fittings for Use with Rigid PVC Conduit and 
Tubing 

FB1-03..................Fittings, Cast Metal Boxes and Conduit Bodies 
for Conduit, Electrical Metallic Tubing and 
Cable 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIAL 

A. Conduit Size: In accordance with the NEC, but not less than 13 mm 
(1/2 inch) unless otherwise shown. Where permitted by the NEC, 13 mm 
(1/2 inch) flexible conduit may be used for tap connections to recessed 
lighting fixtures. 

B. Conduit: 

1. Rigid galvanized steel: Shall Conform to UL 6, ANSI C80.1. 

2. Rigid intermediate steel conduit (IMC): Shall Conform to UL 1242, 
ANSI C80.6. 

3. Electrical metallic tubing (EMT): Shall Conform to UL 797, ANSI 
C80.3. Maximum size not to exceed 105 mm (4 inch) and shall be 
permitted only with cable rated 600 volts or less. 


4. Flexible galvanized steel conduit: Shall Conform to UL 1. 

5. Liquid-tight flexible metal conduit: Shall Conform to UL 360. 

6. Direct burial plastic conduit: Shall conform to UL 651 and UL 651A, 
heavy wall PVC or high density polyethylene (PE). 

7. Surface metal raceway: Shall Conform to UL 5. 

C. Conduit Fittings: 

1. Rigid steel and IMC conduit fittings: 

a. Fittings shall meet the requirements of UL 514B and ANSI/ NEMA 
FB1. 

a. Standard threaded couplings, locknuts, bushings, and elbows: Only 
steel or malleable iron materials are acceptable. Integral 
retractable type IMC couplings are also acceptable. 

b. Locknuts: Bonding type with sharp edges for digging into the metal 
wall of an enclosure. 

c. Bushings: Metallic insulating type, consisting of an insulating 
insert molded or locked into the metallic body of the fitting. 
Bushings made entirely of metal or nonmetallic material are not 
permitted. 

d. Erickson (union-type) and set screw type couplings: Approved for 
use in concrete are permitted for use to complete a conduit run 
where conduit is installed in concrete. Use set screws of case 
hardened steel with hex head and cup point to firmly seat in 
conduit wall for positive ground. Tightening of set screws with 
pliers is prohibited. 

e. Sealing fittings: Threaded cast iron type. Use continuous drain 
type sealing fittings to prevent passage of water vapor. In 
concealed work, install fittings in flush steel boxes with blank 
cover plates having the same finishes as that of other electrical 
plates in the room. 

3. Flexible steel conduit fittings: 

a. Conform to UL 514B. Only steel or malleable iron materials are 
acceptable. 

b. Clamp type, with insulated throat. 

4. Liquid-tight flexible metal conduit fittings: 

a. Fittings shall meet the requirements of UL 514B and ANSI/ NEMA 
FB1. 

b. Only steel or malleable iron materials are acceptable. 

c. Fittings must incorporate a threaded grounding cone, a steel or 
plastic compression ring, and a gland for tightening. Connectors 
shall have insulated throats. 

5. Direct burial plastic conduit fittings: 


a. Fittings shall meet the requirements of UL 514C and NEMA TC3. 

b. As recommended by the conduit manufacturer. 

6. Surface metal raceway fittings: As recommended by the raceway 
manufacturer. 

7. Expansion and deflection couplings: 

a. Conform to UL 467 and UL 514B. 

b. Accommodate, 19 mm (0.75 inch) deflection, expansion, or 
contraction in any direction, and allow 30 degree angular 
deflections. 

c. Include internal flexible metal braid sized to guarantee conduit 
ground continuity and fault currents in accordance with UL 467, 
and the NEC code tables for ground conductors. 

d. Jacket: Flexible, corrosion-resistant, watertight, moisture and 
heat resistant molded rubber material with stainless steel jacket 
clamps. 

D. Conduit Supports: 

1. Parts and hardware: Zinc-coat or provide equivalent corrosion 
protection. 

2. Individual Conduit Hangers: Designed for the purpose, having a 
pre-assembled closure bolt and nut, and provisions for receiving a 
hanger rod. 

3. Multiple conduit (trapeze) hangers: Not less than 38 mm by 38 mm 
(1-1/2 by 1-1/2 inch), 12 gage steel, cold formed, lipped channels; 
with not less than 9 mm (3/8 inch) diameter steel hanger rods. 

4. Solid Masonry and Concrete Anchors: Self-drilling expansion shields, 
or machine bolt expansion. 

E. Outlet, Junction, and Pull Boxes: 

1. UL-50 and UL-514A. 

2. Cast metal where required by the NEC or shown, and equipped with 
rustproof boxes. 

3. Sheet metal boxes: Galvanized steel, except where otherwise shown. 

4. Flush mounted wall or ceiling boxes shall be installed with raised 
covers so that front face of raised cover is flush with the wall. 
Surface mounted wall or ceiling boxes shall be installed with surface 
style flat or raised covers. 

F. Wireways: Equip with hinged covers, except where removable covers are 
shown. 


PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 PENETRATIONS 

A. Cutting or Holes: 


1. Locate holes in advance where they are proposed in the structural 
sections such as ribs or beams. Obtain the approval of COTR prior to 
drilling through structural sections. 

2. Cut holes through concrete and masonry in new and existing structures 
with a diamond core drill or concrete saw. Pneumatic hammer, impact 
electric, hand or manual hammer type drills are not allowed, except 
where permitted by the COTR as required by limited working space. 

B. Fire Stop: Where conduits, wireways, and other communications raceways 
pass through fire partitions, fire walls, smoke partitions, or floors, 
install a fire stop that provides an effective barrier against the 
spread of fire, smoke and gases as specified in Section 07 84 00, 
FIRESTOPPING, with rock wool fiber or silicone foam sealant only. 
Completely fill and seal clearances between raceways and openings with 
the fire stop material. 

3.2 INSTALLATION, GENERAL 

A. Install conduit as follows: 

1. In complete runs before pulling in cables or wires. 

2. Flattened, dented, or deformed conduit is not permitted. Remove and 
replace the damaged conduits with new undamaged material. 

3. Assure conduit installation does not encroach into the ceiling height 
head room, walkways, or doorways. 

4. Cut square with a hacksaw, ream, remove burrs, and draw up tight. 

5. Mechanically continuous. 

6. Independently support conduit at 8’0” on center. Do not use other 
supports i.e., (suspended ceilings, suspended ceiling supporting 
members, lighting fixtures, conduits, mechanical piping, or 
mechanical ducts). 

7. Support within 300 mm (1 foot) of changes of direction, and within 
300 mm (1 foot) of each enclosure to which connected. 

8. Close ends of empty conduit with plugs or caps at the rough-in stage 
to prevent entry of debris, until wires are pulled in. 

9. Conduit installations under fume and vent hoods are prohibited. 

10. Secure conduits to cabinets, junction boxes, pull boxes and outlet 
boxes with bonding type locknuts. For rigid and IMC conduit 
installations, provide a locknut on the inside of the enclosure, made 
up wrench tight. Do not make conduit connections to junction box 
covers. 

11. Flashing of penetrations of the roof membrane is specified in Section 
07 60 00, FLASHING AND SHEET METAL. 

12. Do not use aluminum conduits in wet locations. 


13. Unless otherwise indicated on the drawings or specified herein, all 
conduits shall be installed concealed within finished walls, floors 
and ceilings. 

B. Conduit Bends: 

1. Make bends with standard conduit bending machines. 

2. Conduit hickey may be used for slight offsets, and for straightening 
stubbed out conduits. 

3. Bending of conduits with a pipe tee or vise is prohibited. 

C. Layout and Homeruns: 

2. Deviations: Make only where necessary to avoid interferences and only 
after drawings showing the proposed deviations have been submitted 
approved by the COTR. 

3.3 CONCEALED WORK INSTALLATION 

A. In Concrete: 

1. Conduit: Rigid steel, IMC or EMT. Do not install EMT in concrete 
slabs that are in contact with soil, gravel or vapor barriers. 

2. Align and run conduit in direct lines. 

3. Install conduit through concrete beams only when the following 
occurs: 

a. Where shown on the structural drawings. 

b. As approved by the COTR prior to construction, and after submittal 
of drawing showing location, size, and position of each 
penetration. 

4. Installation of conduit in concrete that is less than 75 mm (3 
inches) thick is prohibited. 

a. Conduit outside diameter larger than 1/3 of the slab thickness is 
prohibited. 

b. Space between conduits in slabs: Approximately six conduit 
diameters apart, except one conduit diameter at conduit crossings. 

c. Install conduits approximately in the center of the slab so that 
there will be a minimum of 19 mm (3/4 inch) of concrete around the 
conduits. 

5. Make couplings and connections watertight. Use thread compounds that 
are UL approved conductive type to insure low resistance ground 
continuity through the conduits. Tightening set screws with pliers is 
prohibited. 

B. Furred or Suspended Ceilings and in Walls: 

1. Conduit for conductors above 600 volts: 

a. Rigid steel or rigid aluminum. 

b. Aluminum conduit mixed indiscriminately with other types in the 
same system is prohibited. 


2. Conduit for conductors 600 volts and below: 

a. Rigid steel, IMC, rigid aluminum, or EMT. Different type conduits 
mixed indiscriminately in the same system is prohibited. 

3. Align and run conduit parallel or perpendicular to the building 
lines. 

4. Connect recessed lighting fixtures to conduit runs with maximum 1800 
mm (six feet) of flexible metal conduit extending from a junction box 
to the fixture. 

5. Tightening set screws with pliers is prohibited. 

3.4 EXPOSED WORK INSTALLATION 

A. Unless otherwise indicated on the drawings, exposed conduit is only 
permitted in mechanical and electrical rooms. 

B. Conduit for conductors above 600 volts: 

1. Rigid steel or rigid aluminum. 

2. Aluminum conduit mixed indiscriminately with other types in the same 
system is prohibited. 

C. Conduit for Conductors 600 volts and below: 

1. Rigid steel, IMC, rigid aluminum, or EMT. Different type of conduits 
mixed indiscriminately in the system is prohibited. 

D. Align and run conduit parallel or perpendicular to the building lines. 

E. Install horizontal runs close to the ceiling or beams and secure with 
conduit straps. 

F. Support horizontal or vertical runs at not over 2400 mm (eight foot) 
intervals. 

G. Surface metal raceways: Use only where shown. 

H. Painting: 

1. Paint exposed conduit as specified in Section09 91 00, PAINTING. 

2. Paint all conduits containing cables rated over 600 volts safety 
orange. Refer to Section 09 91 00, PAINTING for preparation, paint 
type, and exact color. In addition, paint legends, using 50 mm (two 
inch) high black numerals and letters, showing the cable voltage 
rating. Provide legends where conduits pass through walls and floors 
and at maximum 6000 mm (20 foot) intervals in between. 

3.5 EXPANSION JOINTS 

A. Conduits 75 mm (3 inches) and larger, that are secured to the building 
structure on opposite sides of a building expansion joint, require 
expansion and deflection couplings. Install the couplings in accordance 
with the manufacturer's recommendations. 

B. Provide conduits smaller than 75 mm (3 inches) with junction boxes on 
both sides of the expansion joint. Connect conduits to junction boxes 
with sufficient slack of flexible conduit to produce 125 mm (5 inch) 


vertical drop midway between the ends. Flexible conduit shall have a 
copper green ground bonding jumper installed. In lieu of this flexible 
conduit, expansion and deflection couplings as specified above for 375 
mm (15 inches) and larger conduits are acceptable. 

C. Install expansion and deflection couplings where shown. 

D. Seismic Areas: In seismic areas, provide conduits rigidly secured to the 
building structure on opposite sides of a building expansion joint with 
junction boxes on both sides of the joint. Connect conduits to junction 
boxes with 375 mm (15 inches) of slack flexible conduit. Flexible 
conduit shall have a copper green ground bonding jumper installed. 

3.6 CONDUIT SUPPORTS, INSTALLATION 

A. Safe working load shall not exceed 1/4 of proof test load of fastening 
devices. 

B. Use pipe straps or individual conduit hangers for supporting individual 
conduits. Maximum distance between supports is 2.5 m (8 foot) on center. 

C. Support multiple conduit runs with trapeze hangers. Use trapeze hangers 
that are designed to support a load equal to or greater than the sum of 
the weights of the conduits, wires, hanger itself, and 90 kg (200 
pounds). Attach each conduit with U-bolts or other approved fasteners. 

D. Support conduit independently of junction boxes, pull boxes, fixtures, 
suspended ceiling T-bars, angle supports, and similar items. 

E. Fasteners and Supports in Solid Masonry and Concrete: 

1. New Construction: Use steel or malleable iron concrete inserts set in 
place prior to placing the concrete. 

2. Existing Construction: 

a. Steel expansion anchors not less than 6 mm (1/4 inch) bolt size 
and not less than 28 mm (1-1/8 inch) embedment. 

b. Power set fasteners not less than 6 mm (1/4 inch) diameter with 
depth of penetration not less than 75 mm (3 inches). 

c. Use vibration and shock resistant anchors and fasteners for 
attaching to concrete ceilings. 

F. Hollow Masonry: Toggle bolts are permitted. 

G. Bolts supported only by plaster or gypsum wallboard are not acceptable. 

H. Metal Structures: Use machine screw fasteners or other devices 
specifically designed and approved for the application. 

I. Attachment by wood plugs, rawl plug, plastic, lead or soft metal 
anchors, or wood blocking and bolts supported only by plaster is 
prohibited. 

J. Chain, wire, or perforated strap shall not be used to support or fasten 
conduit. 


K. Spring steel type supports or fasteners are prohibited for all uses 
except: Horizontal and vertical supports/fasteners within walls. 

L. Vertical Supports: Vertical conduit runs shall have riser clamps and 
supports in accordance with the NEC and as shown. Provide supports for 
cable and wire with fittings that include internal wedges and retaining 
collars. 

3.7 BOX INSTALLATION 

A. Boxes for Concealed Conduits: 

1. Flush mounted. 

2. Provide raised covers for boxes to suit the wall or ceiling, 
construction and finish. 

B. In addition to boxes shown, install additional boxes where needed to 
prevent damage to cables and wires during pulling in operations. 

C. Remove only knockouts as required and plug unused openings. Use 
threaded plugs for cast metal boxes and snap-in metal covers for sheet 
metal boxes. 

D. Stencil or install phenolic nameplates on covers of the boxes identified 
on riser diagrams; for example "SIG-FA JB No. 1". 

3.11 COMMUNICATION SYSTEM CONDUIT 

A. Install the communication raceway system as shown on drawings. 

B. Minimum conduit size of 19 mm (3/4 inch), but not less than the size 
shown on the drawings. 

C. All conduit ends shall be equipped with insulated bushings. 

D. All 100 mm (four inch) conduits within buildings shall include pull 
boxes after every two 90 degree bends. Size boxes per the NEC. 

E. Vertical conduits/sleeves through closets floors shall terminate not 
less than 75 mm (3 inches) below the floor and not less than 75 mm (3 
inches) below the ceiling of the floor below. 

F. Terminate conduit runs to/from a backboard in a closet or interstitial 
space at the top or bottom of the backboard. Conduits shall enter 
communication closets next to the wall and be flush with the backboard. 

G. Were drilling is necessary for vertical conduits, locate holes so as not 
to affect structural sections such as ribs or beams. 

H. All empty conduits located in communication closets or on backboards 
shall be sealed with a standard non-hardening duct seal compound to 
prevent the entrance of moisture and gases and to meet fire resistance 
requirements. 

I. Conduit runs shall contain no more than four quarter turns (90 degree 
bends) between pull boxes/backboards. Minimum radius of communication 
conduit bends shall be as follows (special long radius): 


 

Sizes of Conduit 

Trade Size 

Radius of Conduit Bends 

mm, Inches 

3/4 

150 (6) 

1 

230 (9) 

1-1/4 

350 (14) 

1-1/2 

430 (17) 

2 

525 (21) 

2-1/2 

635 (25) 

3 

775 (31) 

3-1/2 

900 (36) 

4 

1125 (45) 



 

J. Furnish and install 19 mm (3/4 inch) thick fire retardant plywood 
specified in Section 06 10 00, ROUGH CARPENTRY on the wall of 
communication closets where shown on drawings . Mount the plywood with 
the bottom edge 300 mm (one foot) above the finished floor. 

K. Furnish and pull wire in all empty conduits. (Sleeves through floor are 
exceptions). 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 27 15 00 
COMMUNICATIONS HORIZONTAL CABLING 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This Section specifies the furnishing, installing, certification, 
testing, and guaranty of a complete and operating Voice and Digital 
Cable Distribution System (here-in-after referred to as “the System”), 
and associated equipment and hardware to be installed in the VA 
/Medical Center, here-in-after referred to as “the Facility”. The 
System shall include, but not be limited to: equipment cabinets, 
interface enclosures, and relay racks; necessary combiners, traps, and 
filters; and necessary passive devices such as: splitters, couplers, 
cable “patch”, “punch down”, and cross-connector blocks or devices, 
voice and data distribution sub-systems, and associated hardware. The 
System shall additionally include, but not be limited to: 
telecommunication closets (TC); telecommunications outlets (TCO); 
copper and fiber optic distribution cables, connectors, “patch” cables, 
and/or “break out” devices. 

B. The System shall be delivered free of engineering, manufacturing, 
installation, and functional defects. It shall be designed, engineered 
and installed for ease of operation, maintenance, and testing. 

C. The term “provide”, as used herein, shall be defined as: designed, 
engineered, furnished, installed, certified, and tested, by the 
Contractor. 

D. The Voice and Digital Telecommunication Distribution Cable Equipment 
and System provides the media which voice and data information travels 
over and connects to the Telephone System which is defined as an 
Emergency Critical Care Communication System by the National Fire 
Protection Association (NFPA). Therefore, since the System connects to 
or extends the telephone system, the System’s installation and 
operation shall adhere to all appropriate National, Government, and/or 
Local Life Safety and/or Support Codes, which ever are the more 
stringent for this Facility. At a minimum , the System shall be 
installed according to NFPA, Section 70, National Electrical Code 
(NEC), Article 517 and Chapter 7; NFPA, Section 99, Health Care 
Facilities, Chapter 3-4; NFPA, Section 101, Life Safety Code, Chapters 
7, 12, and/or 13; Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care 
Organization (JCAHCO), Manual for Health Care Facilities, all necessary 


Life Safety and/or Support guidelines; this specification; and the 
original equipment manufacturer's (OEM) suggested installation design, 
recommendations, and instructions. The OEM and Contractor shall ensure 
that all management, sales, engineering, and installation personnel 
have read and understand the requirements of this specification before 
the System is designed, engineered, delivered, and provided. 

E. The VA Project Manager (PM) and/or if delegated, Resident Engineer (RE) 
are the approving authorities for all contractual and mechanical 
changes to the System. The Contractor is cautioned to obtain in 
writing, all approvals for system changes relating to the published 
contract specifications and drawings, from the PM and/or the RE before 
proceeding with the change. 

F. System Performance: 

1. At a minimum, the System shall be able to support the following 
voice and data operations for Category 6 Certified Telecommunication 
Service: 

a. Provide the following interchange (or interface) capabilities: 

1) Basic Rate (BRI). 

2) Primary Rate (PRI). 

2. At a minimum the System shall support the following operating 
parameters: 

a. EPBX connection: 

1) System speed: 1.0 gBps per second, minimum. 

2) Impedance: 600 Ohms. 

3) Cross Modulation: -60 deci-Bel (dB). 

4) Hum Modulation: -55 dB. 

5) System data error: 10 to the -10 Bps, minimum. 

6) Loss: Measured at the frame output with reference Zero (0) 
deciBel measured (dBm) at 1,000 Hertz (Hz) applied to the 
frame input. 

a) Trunk to station: 1.5 dB, maximum. 

b) Station to station: 3.0 dB, maximum. 

c) Internal switch crosstalk: -60 dB when a signal of + 10 
deciBel measured (dBm), 500-2,500 Hz range is applied to 
the primary path. 

d) Idle channel noise: 25 dBm “C” or 3.0 dBm “O” above 
reference (terminated) ground noise, whichever is greater. 

e) Traffic Grade of Service for Voice and Data: 


(1) A minimum grade of service of P-01 with an average 
traffic load of 7.0 CCS per station per hour and a traffic 
overload in the data circuits will not interfere with, or 
degrade, the voice service. 

(2) Average CCS per voice station: The average CCS capacity 
per voice station shall be maintained at 7.0 CCS when the 
EPBX is expanded up to the projected maximum growth as 
stated herein. 

b. Telecommunications Outlet (TCO): 

1) Voice: 

a) Isolation (outlet-outlet): 24 dB. 

b) Impedance: 600 Ohms, balanced (BAL). 

c) Signal Level: 0 deciBel per mili-Volt (dBmV) + 0.1 dBmV. 

d) System speed: 100 mBps, minimum. 

e) System data error: 10 to the -6 Bps, minimum. 

2) Data: 

a) Isolation (outlet-outlet): 24 dB. 

b) Impedance: 600 Ohms, BAL. 

c) Signal Level: 0 dBmV + 0.1 dBmV. 

d) System speed: 120 mBps, minimum. 

e) System data error: 10 to the -8 Bps, minimum. 

3) Fiber optic: 

a) Isolation (outlet-outlet): 36 dB. 

b) Signal Level: 0 dBmV + 0.1 dBmV. 

c) System speed: 540 mBps, minimum. 

D) SYSTEM DATA ERROR: 10 TO THE -6 BPS, MINIMUM. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Specification Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND 
SAMPLES. 

B. Specification Section 27 05 11, REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMUNICATIONS 
INSTALLATIONS. 

C. Specification Section 27 05 33, RACEWAYS AND BOXES FOR COMMUNICATIONS 
SYSTEMS. 

D. Specification Section 27 10 00, STRUCTURED CABLING. 

E. Specification Section 26 27 26, WIRING DEVICES. 

F. Specification Section 27 05 26, GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR 
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS. 


1.3 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in text by basic 
designation only. Except for a specific date given the issue in effect 
(including amendments, addenda, revisions, supplements, and errata) on 
the date the system’s submittal is technically approved by VA, shall be 
enforced. 

B. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

 

70 

NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE (NEC) 

75 

Protection of Electronic Computer/Data Processing 
Equipment 

77 

Recommended Practice on Static Electricity 

 

Standard for Health Care Facilities 

101 

Life Safety Code 

1221 

Emergency Services Communication Systems 



 

C. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): 

65 

Wired Cabinets 

96 

Lightning Protection Components 

96A 

INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHTNING 
PROTECTION SYSTEMS 

467 

Grounding and Bonding Equipment 

497/497A/497B 

PROTECTORS FOR PAIRED CONDUCTORS/ 
COMMUNICATIONS CIRCUITS/DATA COMMUNICATIONS 
AND FIRE ALARM CIRCUITS 

884 

Underfloor Raceways and Fittings 



 

D. ANSI/EIA/TIA Publications: 

568B 

Commercial Building Telecommunications Wiring 
Standard 

569B 

Commercial Building Standard for 
Telecommunications Pathways and Spaces 

606A 

ADMINISTRATION STANDARD FOR THE 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE OF 
COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS 

607A 

Grounding and Bonding Requirements for 
Telecommunications in Commercial Buildings 

758 

Grounding and Bonding Requirements for 
Telecommunications in Commercial Buildings 




 

E. Lucent Technologies: Document 900-200-318 “Outside Plant Engineering 
Handbook”. 

F. International Telecommunication Union – Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T). 

G. Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) Publications. 

H. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Publications: Standards for 
telephone equipment and systems. 

I. United States Air Force: Technical Order 33K-l-lOO Test Measurement and 
Diagnostic Equipment (TMDE) Interval Reference Guide. 

J. Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care Organization (JCAHO): 
Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals. 

K. National and/or Government Life Safety Code(s): The more stringent of 
each listed code. 

1.4 QUALITY ASSURANCE 

A. The authorized representative of the OEM, shall be responsible for the 
design, satisfactory total operation of the System, and its 
certification. 

B. The OEM shall meet the minimum requirements identified in Paragraph 
2.1.A. Additionally, the Contractor shall have had experience with 
three or more installations of systems of comparable size and 
complexity with regards to coordinating, engineering, testing, 
certifying, supervising, training, and documentation. Identification of 
these installations shall be provided as a part of the submittal as 
identified in Paragraph 1.5. 

C. The System Contractor shall submit certified documentation that they 
have been an authorized distributor and service organization for the 
OEM for a minimum of three (3) years. The System Contractor shall be 
authorized by the OEM to certify and warranty the installed equipment. 
In addition, the OEM and System Contractor shall accept complete 
responsibility for the design, installation, certification, operation, 
and physical support for the System. This documentation, along with the 
System Contractor and OEM certification must be provided in writing as 
part of the Contractor’s Technical Submittal. 

D. All equipment, cabling, terminating hardware, TCOs, and patch cords 
shall be sourced from the certifying OEM or at the OEM’s direction, and 
support the System design, the OEM’s quality control and validity of 
the OEM’s warranty. 


E. The Contractor’s Telecommunications Technicians assigned to the System 
shall be fully trained, qualified, and certified by the OEM on the 
engineering, installation, and testing of the System. The Contractor 
shall provide formal written evidence of current OEM certification(s) 
for the installer(s) as a part of the submittal or to the RE before 
being allowed to commence work on the System. 

1.5 SUBMITTALS 

A. Provide submittals in accordance with Specification Section 01 33 23, 
SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. The RE shall retain one copy 
for review and approval. 

1. If the submittal is approved the RE shall retain one copy for 
Official Records and return three (3) copies to the Contractor. 

2. If the submittal is disapproved, three (3) copies will be returned 
to the Contractor with a written explanation attached that indicates 
the areas the submittal deviated from the System specifications. The 
RE shall retain one copy for Official Records. 

B. Environmental Requirements: Technical submittals shall confirm the 
environmental specifications for physical TC areas occupied by the 
System. These environmental specifications shall identify the 
requirements for initial and expanded system configurations for: 

1. Floor loading for batteries and cabinets. 

2. Minimum floor space and ceiling heights. 

3. Minimum size of doors for equipment passage. 

4. Power requirements: The Contractor shall provide the specific 
voltage, amperage, phases, and quantities of circuits required. 

5. Air conditioning, heating, and humidity requirements. The Contractor 
shall identify the ambient temperature and relative humidity 
operating ranges required preventing equipment damage. 

6. Air conditioning requirements (expressed in BTU per hour, based on 
adequate dissipation of generated heat to maintain required room and 
equipment standards). 

7. Proposed floor plan, based on the expanded system configuration of 
the bidder's proposed EPBX for this FACILITY. 

8. Conduit size requirement (between main TC, computer, and console 
rooms). 

9. Main backbone, trunk line, riser, and horizontal cable pathways, 
cable duct, and conduit requirements between each MTC, TC, and TCO. 


C. Documents: The submittal shall be separated into sections for each 
subsystem and shall contain the following: 

1. Title page to include: 

a. VA Medical Center. 

b. Contractor’s name, address, and telephone (including FAX) 
numbers. 

c. Date of Submittal. 

d. VA Project No. 

2. List containing a minimum of three locations of installations of 
similar size and complexity as identified herein. These locations 
shall contain the following: 

a. Installation Location and Name. 

b. Owner’s or User’s name, address, and telephone (including FAX) 
numbers. 

c. Date of Project Start and Date of Final Acceptance by Owner. 

d. System Project Number. 

e. Brief (three paragraphs minimum) description of each system’s 
function, operation, and installation. 

3. Narrative Description of the system. 

4. A List of the equipment to be furnished. The quantity, make, and 
model number of each item is required. Select the required equipment 
items quantities that will satisfy the needs of the system. 

 

QUANTITY 

UNIT 

As required 

Cross Connection (CCS) Systems 

As required 

Wire Management System/Equipment 

As required 

Telecommunications Outlets (TCO) 

As required 

Distribution Cables 

As required 

TCO Connection Cables 

As required 

System Connectors 

As required 

Terminators 

As required 

Distribution Frames 

As required 

Telecommunications Closets (TC) 

As required 

Environmental Requirements 

1 ea. 

Installation Kit 



 


5. Pictorial layouts of each MTC, IMTC, and RTCs; MCCS, IMCCS, VCCS, 
and HCCS termination cabinet(s), each distribution cabinet layout 
drawing, and TCO as each is expected to be installed and configured. 

6. Equipment technical literature detailing the electrical and 
technical characteristics of each item of equipment to be furnished. 

7. Engineering drawings of the System, showing calculated signal levels 
at the EPBX output, each input and output distribution point, 
proposed TCO values, and signal level at each TCO multipin, 
fiberoptic, and jack. 

8. List of test equipment as per paragraph 1.5.D. below. 

9. Letter certifying that the Contractor understands the requirements 
of the SAMPLES Paragraph 1.5.E. 

10. Letter certifying that the Contractor understands the requirements 
of Section 3.2 concerning acceptance tests. 

D. Test Equipment List: 

1. The Contractor is responsible for furnishing all test equipment 
required to test the system in accordance with the parameters 
specified. Unless otherwise stated, the test equipment shall not be 
considered part of the system. The Contractor shall furnish test 
equipment of accuracy better than the parameters to be tested. 

2. The test equipment furnished by the Contractor shall have a 
calibration tag of an acceptable calibration service dated not more 
than 12 months prior to the test. As part of the submittal, a test 
equipment list shall be furnished that includes the make and model 
number of the following type of equipment as a minimum: 

a. Spectrum Analyzer. 

b. Signal Level Meter. 

c. Volt-Ohm Meter. 

d. Time Domain Reflectometer (TDR) with strip chart recorder (Data 
and Optical Measuring). 

e. Bit Error Test Set (BERT). 

f. Camera with a minimum of 60 pictures to that will develop 
immediately to include appropriate test equipment adapters. A 
video camera in VHS format is an acceptable alternate. 

E. Samples: A sample of each of the following items shall be furnished to 
the RE for approval prior to installation. 

1. TCO Wall Outlet Box 4" x 4"x 2.5" with: 

a. One each telephone (or voice) rj45 jack installed. 


b. Two each multi pin data rj45 jacks installed. 

c. Cover Plate installed. 

2. Data CCS patch panel, punch block or connection device with RJ45 
connectors installed. 

3. Telephone CCS system with IDC and/or RJ45 connectors and cable 
terminal equipment installed. 

4. 610 mm (2 ft.) section of each copper cable to be used with cable 
sweep tags as specified in paragraph 2.4.H and connectors installed. 

5. 610 mm (2 ft.) section of each fiber optic cable to be used with 
cable sweep tags as specified in paragraph 2.4.H and connectors 

F. Certifications: 

1. Submit written certification from the OEM indicating that the 
proposed supervisor of the installation and the proposed provider of 
the contract maintenance are authorized representatives of the OEM. 
Include the individual's exact name and address and OEM credentials 
in the certification. 

2. Submit written certification from the OEM that the wiring and 
connection diagrams meet National and/or Government Life Safety 
Guidelines, NFPA, NEC, UL, this specification, and JCAHCO 
requirements and instructions, requirements, recommendations, and 
guidance set forth by the OEM for the proper performance of the 
System as described herein. The VA will not approve any submittal 
without this certification. 

3. Preacceptance Certification: This certification shall be made in 
accordance with the test procedure outlined in paragraph 3.2.B. 

G. Equipment Manuals: Fifteen (15) working days prior to the scheduled 
acceptance test, the Contractor shall deliver four complete sets of 
commercial operation and maintenance manuals for each item of equipment 
furnished as part of the System to the RE. The manuals shall detail the 
theory of operation and shall include narrative descriptions, pictorial 
illustrations, block and schematic diagrams, and parts list. 

H. Record Wiring Diagrams: 

1. Fifteen (15) working days prior to the acceptance test, the 
Contractor shall deliver four complete sets of the Record Wiring 
Diagrams of the System to the RE. The diagrams shall show all inputs 
and outputs of electronic and passive equipment correctly identified 
according to the markers installed on the interconnecting cables, 
Equipment and room/area locations. 


2. The Record Wiring Diagrams shall be in hard copy and two compact 
disk (CD) copies properly formatted to match the Facility’s current 
operating version of Computer Aided Drafting (AutoCAD) system. The 
RE shall verify and inform the Contractor of the version of AutoCAD 
being used by the Facility. 

I. Surveys Required As A Part Of The Technical Submittal: The Contractor 
shall provide the following surveys that depict various system features 
and capacities are required in addition to the on site survey 
requirements described herein. Each survey shall be in writing and 
contain the following information (the formats are suggestions and may 
be used for the initial Technical Submittal survey requirements), as a 
minimum: 

1. The required EPBX connections (each CSU shall be compatible with) 
shall be compatible with the following: 

a. Initially connect: 


 

EQUIPPED ITEM 

CAPACITY 

WIREDCAPACITY 

Main Station Lines 

 

 

Single Line 

 

 

Multi Line (Equipped for direct input 
dial [DID]) 

 

 

Central Office (CO) Trunks 

 

 

TWO WAY 

 

 

DID 

 

 

Two-way DRTL 

 

 

Foreign Exchange (FX) 

 

 

Conference 

 

 

CO Trunk By-pass 

 

 

CRT w/keyboard 

 

 

Printers 

 

 



 

b. Projected Maximum Growth: The Contractor shall clearly and fully 
indicate this category for each item identified in Paragraph 
1.4.H.1.a. as a part of the technical submittal. For this 
purpose, the following definitions and sample connections are 
provided to detail the system’s capability: 

 


EQUIPPED ITEM 

CAPACITY 

WIRED CAPACITY 

Servers 

 

 

PC’s 

 

 

Projected Maximum Growth 

 

 



 

 The Contractor shall clearly and fully indicate this category for 
each item identified in Paragraph 1.4.H.2.a. as a part of the 
technical submittal. 

2. Cable Distribution System Design Plan: A design plan for the entire 
cable distribution systems requirements shall be provided with this 
document. A specific cable count shall coincide with the total 
growth items as described herein. It is the Contractor’s 
responsibility to provide the Systems entire cable requirements and 
engineer a distribution system requirement plan using the format of 
the following paragraph(s), at a minimum: 

a. UTP (and/or STP) Requirements/Column Explanation: 

 

Column 

Explanation 

FROM BUILDING 

Identifies the building by number, title, 
or location, and main signal closet or 
intermediate signal closet cabling is 
provided from 

BUILDING 

Identifies the building by number, title, 
or location cabling is to be provided in 

TO BUILDING IMC 

Identifies building main terminal signal 
closet, by room number or location, to 
which cabling is provided too, in, and from 

FLOOR 

Identifies the floor by number (i.e. 1st, 
2nd, etc.) cabling and TCOs are to be 
provided 

TC ROOM NUMBER 

Identifies the floor signal closet room, by 
room number, which cabling shall be 
provided 

ROOM NUMBER 

Identifies the room, by number, from which 
cabling and TCOs shall be provided 

NUMBER OF CABLE 
PAIR 

Identifies the number of cable pair 
required to be provided on each floor 
designated OR the number of cable pair (VA 
Owned) to be retained 

NUMBER OF STRANDS 
USED/SPARE 

Identifies the number of strands provided 
in each run 



 


b. Fiber Optic Cabling Requirements/Column Explanation: 

 

Column 

Explanation 

FROM BUILDING 

Identifies the building by number, title, 
or location, and main signal closet or 
intermediate signal closet cabling is 
provided from 

TO BUILDING IMC 

Identifies building, by number, title, or 
location, to which cabling is provided 

FLOOR 

Identifies the floor by number (i.e. 1st, 
2nd, etc.) 

TC ROOM NUMBER 

Identifies the room, by number, from which 
cabling shall be installed 

NUMBER OF STRANDS 

Identifies the number of strands in each 
run of fiber optic cable 

INSTALLED METHOD 

Identifies the method of installation in 
accordance with as designated herein 

NOTES 

Identifies a note number for a special 
feature or equipment 

BUILDING MTC 

Identifies the building by number or title 



 

3. Telecommunication Outlets: The Contractor shall clearly and fully 
indicate this category for each outlet location and compare the 
total count to the locations identified above as a part of the 
technical submittal. Additionally, the Contractor shall indicate the 
total number of spares. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS 

A. System Requirements: 

1. The System shall provide the following minimum services that are 
designed in accordance with and supported by an Original Equipment 
Manufacturer (OEM), and as specified herein. The System shall 
provide continuous inter and/or intra-Facility voice and data, 
service. The System shall be capacity sized so that loss of 
connectivity to external telephone systems shall not affect the 
Facilities operation in specific designated locations. The System 
shall: 

a. Be capable of inter-connecting and functioning fully with the 
existing Local Telephone Exchange (LEC) Network(s), Federal 
Telephone System (FTS) Inter-city Network(s), Inter-exchange 


Carriers, Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN), Electronic 
Private Branch Exchange (EPBX) switches, asynchronous/synchronous 
data terminals and circuits including Automatic Transfer Mode 
(ATM), Frame Relay, and local area networks (LAN), at a minimum. 

b. Be a voice and data cable distribution system that is based on a 
physical “Star” Topology. 

c. Be compatible with and able to provide direct digital connection 
to trunk level equipment including, but, not limited to: directly 
accessing trunk level equipment including the telephone system, 
audio paging, Industry Standard “T” and/or “DS” carrier services 
and external protocol converters. Additionally, connections to 
“T” and/or “DS” access/equipment or Customer Service Units (CSU) 
that are used in FTS and other trunk applications shall be 
included in the System design. Provide T-1 access/equipment (or 
CSU), as required for use, in FTS and other trunk applications by 
system design if this equipment is not provided by the existing 
telephone system and/or will be deactivated by the installation 
of the System. The Contractor shall provide all T-1 equipment 
necessary to terminate and make operational the quantity of 
circuits designated. The CSU's shall be connected to the System’s 
emergency battery power supply. The System shall be fully capable 
of operating in the Industry Standard “DS” protocol and provide 
that service when required. 

d. Where the System connects to an existing or future telephone 
system, refer to specification Section 27 31 00, VOICE 
COMMUNICATIONS SWITCHING AND ROUTING EQUIPMENT for specific 
telephone equipment and system operational performance standards. 

2. Cable Systems - Twisted Pair and Fiber optic, and Analog RF Coaxial: 

a. General: 

1) The Contractor shall be responsible for providing a new system 
conforming to current and accepted telephone and digital 
industrial/commercial cable distribution standards. The 
distribution cable installation shall be fully coordinated 
with the Facility, the PM, the RE and the Contractor prior to 
the start of installation. 

2) The Contractor is responsible for complete knowledge of the 
space and cable pathways (i.e. equipment rooms, TCs, conduits, 
wireways, etc.) of the Facility. The Contractor shall at a 


minimum design and install the System using the Pathway Design 
Handbook H-088C3, TIA/EIA Telecommunications Building Wiring 
Standards, and Facility Chief of Information Resource 
Management’s (IRM) instructions, as approved in writing by the 
PM and/or RE. 

3) The System cables shall be fully protected by cable duct, 
trays, wireways, conduit (rigid, thin wall, or flex), and when 
specifically approved, flexible innerduct. It is the 
responsibility of the Contractor to confirm all contract 
drawings and the Facility’s physical layout to determine the 
necessary cable protective devices to be provided. If flexible 
innerduct is used, it shall be installed in the same manner as 
conduit. 

4) Cable provided in the system (i.e. backbone, outside plant, 
inside plant, and station cabling) shall conform to accepted 
industry and OEM standards with regards to size, color code, 
and insulation. The pair twists of any pair shall not be 
exactly the same as any other pair within any unit or sub-unit 
of cables that are bundled in twenty-five (25) pairs or less. 
The absence of specifications regarding details shall imply 
that best general industry practices shall prevail and that 
first quality material and workmanship shall be provided. 
Certification Standards, (i.e., EIA, CCITT, FIPPS, and NFPA) 
shall prevail. 

5) Some areas of this Facility may be considered “plenum”. All 
wire and cable used in support of the installation in those 
areas (if any) shall be in compliance with national and local 
codes pertaining to plenum environments. It is the 
responsibility of the Contractor to review the VA’s cable and 
wire requirements with the RE and the IRM prior to 
installation to confirm the type of environment present at 
each location. 

6) The Contractor shall provide outside and inside plant cables 
that furnishes the number of cable pairs required in 
accordance with the System requirements described herein. The 
Contractor shall fully coordinate and obtain approval of the 
design with the OEM, RE and the IRM prior to installation. 


7) All metallic cable sheaths, etc. shall be grounded by the 
Contractor (i.e.: risers, underground, station wiring, etc.) 
as described herein. 

8) If temporary cable and wire pairs are used, they shall be 
installed so as to not present a pedestrian safety hazard and 
the Contractor shall be responsible for all work associated 
with the temporary installation and for their removal when no 
longer necessary. Temporary cable installations are not 
required to meet Industry Standards; but, must be reviewed and 
approved by the RE and the IRM prior to installation. 

9) Conductors shall be cabled to provide protection against 
induction in voice and data circuits. Crosstalk attenuation 
within the System shall be in excess of -80 dB throughout the 
frequency ranges specified. 

10) Measures shall be employed by the Contractor to minimize the 
radiation of RF noise generated by the System equipment so as 
not to interfere with audio, video, data, computer main 
distribution frame (MDF), telephone customer service unit 
(CSU), and electronic private branch exchange (EPBX) equipment 
the System may service. 

11) The System’s cables shall be labeled on each end and been 
fully tested and certified in writing by the Contractor to the 
RE before proof of performance testing can be conducted. The 
as-installed drawings shall identify each cable as labeled, 
used cable, and bad cable pairs. Minimum test requirements are 
for impedance compliance, inductance, capacitance, signal 
level compliance, opens, shorts, cross talk, noise, and 
distortion, and split pairs on all cables in the frequency 
ranges specified. The tests required for data cable must be 
made to guarantee the operation of this cable at not less than 
10 mega (m) Hertz (Hz) full bandwidth, fully channel loaded 
and a Bit Error Rate of a minimum of 10-6 at the maximum rate 
of speed. All cable installation and test records shall be 
made available at acceptance testing by the RE or Contractor 
and thereafter maintained in the Facility’s Telephone Switch 
Room. All changes (used pair, failed pair, etc.) shall be 
posted in these records as the change occurs. 


12) The Contractor shall coordinate with the COR and the IRM to 
provide all cable pairs/circuits from the Facility Telephone 
Switch Room and establish circuits throughout the Facility for 
all voice, data, computer alarm (except fire alarm), private 
maintenance line, Radio Paging, PA, LAN, DHCP, and any low 
voltage circuits as described herein. 

13) The Contractor shall provide proper test equipment to 
guarantee that cable pairs meet each OEM’s standard 
transmission requirements, and guarantee the cable will carry 
data transmissions at the required speeds, frequencies, and 
fully loaded bandwidth. 

b. Telecommunications Closets (TC): In TC’s that are served with both 
a UTP backbone cable and a fiber optic backbone cable, the UTP 
cable shall be terminated on separate RJ-45, 8-pin connectors with 
110A or equivalent type punch down blocks located on the back or 
front of a 48-port modular patch panel dedicated to data 
applications. Only the UTP backbone cable pairs, identified as 
being connected to the fiber optic backbone, shall be extended to 
the fiber optic interface device. All connecting cables required to 
extend these cables (i.e. patch cords, twenty-five pair connectors, 
etc.), to the fiber optic interface device, in the TC’s shall also 
be provided by the Contractor to insure a complete and operational 
fiber optic distribution system: 

1) In TC’s, which are only served by a UTP backbone cable, the 
cable shall be terminated on separate modular connecting 
devices (110A or equivalent) that are dedicated to data 
applications. In order to provide full service to all data 
cable pairs as identified in each TC/cabinet including spare 
capacity noted herein, the size of all vertical (riser) cables 
and/or outside cables serving these TC’s shall be increased as 
required. 

c. Backbone and Trunk Cables: 

1) The Contractor shall identify, in the technical submittal, the 
voice and data (analog RF coaxial cable shall not be provided 
in main trunk or backbone lines) connecting arrangements 
required by the LEC for interconnection of the System to the 
commercial telephone and FTS networks. The Contractor shall 
provide all required voice and data connecting arrangements. 


2) The Contractor shall be responsible for compatibility of the 
proposed TCs (to be compliant with the EPBX and CSU equipment) 
numbering scheme with the numbering plan for the FTS, DID, 
local stations, and the North American Numbering Plan. The 
Contractor shall consult with the VA and the LEC regarding the 
FTS and North American Numbering plan to be implemented for 
the Facility to ensure system compatibility. 

3) All submitted equipment shall meet or exceed standards, rules, 
and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
and shall be capable of operating without outboard or “extra” 
devices. The Contractor shall identify the FCC registration 
number of the System equipment, EPBX, and proposed CSU (if 
known) in the technical submittal. 

4) A minimum of one (1) 400 shielded twisted pair (STP) cable 
shall be installed from the Telephone Switch Room cross 
connecting system (CCS) to the Main Computer Room MDF. This 
cable shall support the transmission of data information over 
twisted pair cable. The cable shall be tested and terminated 
on a Contractor provided cable management frame, RJ-45 modular 
jacks with eight (8) pin connectors, and 48 port modular patch 
panels located in the Main Computer Room and Telephone Switch 
Room. The cable shall be labeled, terminated, and separated 
from the other cables on the MDF and Telephone Switch Room 
CCS. This requirement shall be fully coordinated and approved 
by the Facility Chief, IRM and the RE prior to installation. 
The cabling requirements of this paragraph are in addition to 
the requirements specified in the System Design Plan 
identified herein. 

d. Horizontal and Station Cable: 

1) A Four (4) UTP 24 AWG station wiring cable shall be installed 
from the top TCO jack to the TC and shall be of a type 
designed to support Category 6 communications (250 mega-Hertz 
[mHz] or above). At the jack location, terminate all four pair 
on the RJ-45/11 jack. At the signal closet, all four pair 
shall be terminated on the modular punch down blocks dedicated 
to telephone applications. 

2) A Four (4) UTP 24 AWG (in thermoplastic jacket unless 
otherwise specified by RE) station wiring cable shall be 


installed from each of the two (2) bottom TCO RJ-45 jacks 
(shall conform to EIA/TIA 568 Standard "T568A" and NFPA) to 
the TC and shall be of a type designed to support Category 6 
communications (250 mHz or above). 

e. Telecommunication Outlets (TCO), Jacks: All TCO’s shall have a 
minimum of three (3) RJ-45 type jacks. The top jack shall be an 
eight pin RJ-45/11 compatible jack, labeled, and designated for 
telephone applications only. The bottom two jacks shall be eight 
pin RJ-45 type unkeyed (sometimes called center keyed) jacks, 
labeled, and designated for data. 

g. Patient Bedside Prefabricated Units (PBPU): Where PBPU’s exist in 
the Facility, the Contractor shall identify the single gang "box" 
location on the PBPU designated for installation of the telephone 
jack. This location shall here-in-after be identified as the 
PBTCO. The Contractor shall be responsible for obtaining written 
approval and specific instructions from the PBPU OEM regarding 
the necessary disassembly and reassembly of each PBPU to the 
extent necessary to pull wire from above the ceiling junction box 
to the PBPU box reserved for the PBTCO. A Contractor provided 
stainless steel cover plate approved for use by the PBPU OEM and 
Facility IRM Chief shall finish out the jack installation. Under 
no circumstances shall the Contractor proceed with the PBPU 
installations without the written approval of the PBPU OEM and 
the specific instructions regarding the attachment to or 
modifying of the PBPU. The RE shall be available to assist the 
Contractor in obtaining these approvals and instructions in a 
timely manner as related to the project’s time constraints. It is 
the responsibility of the Contractor to maintain the UL integrity 
of each PBPU. If the Contractor violates that integrity, it shall 
be the responsibility of the Contractor to obtain on site UL recertification 
of the violated PBPU at the direction of the RE and 
at the Contractor’s expense. 

2.2 DISTRIBUTION EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS 

A. Telecommunication Outlet (TCO): 

1. The TCO shall consist of one telephone multipin jack and two data 
multipin jacks mounted in a steel outlet box. A separate 100mm 
(4in.) x 100mm (4in.) x 63mm (2.5in.) steel outlet box with a 
labeled stainless steel faceplate will be used. A second 100mm 


(4in.) x 100mm (4in.) x 63mm (2.5in.) steel outlet box with a 
labeled faceplate shall be provided as required adjacent to the 
first box to ensure system connections and expandability 
requirements are met. 

2. All telephone multipin connections shall be RJ-45/11 compatible 
female types. All data multipin connections shall be RJ-45 female 
types. 

3. The TCO shall be fed from the appropriate CCS located in the 
respective RTC in a manner to provide a uniform and balanced 
distribution system. 

4. Interface of the data multipin jacks to appropriate patch panels (or 
approved “punch down” blocks) in the associated RTC, is the 
responsibility of the Contractor. The Contractor shall not extend 
data cables from the RTCs to data terminal equipment or install data 
terminal equipment. 

5. The wall outlet shall be provided with a stainless steel or approve 
alternate cover plate to fit the telephone multipin jack, data 
multi- pin jacks and the outlet box provided (100mm (4in.) x 100mm 
(4in.) for single and 100mm (4in.) x 200mm (8in.) for dual outlet 
box applications). For PBPU installations, the cover plate shall be 
stainless steel. 

B. Distribution Cables: Each cable shall meet or exceed the following 
specifications for the specific type of cable. Each cable reel shall 
be sweep tested and certified by the OEM by tags affixed to each 
reel. The Contractor shall turn over all sweep tags to the RE or PM. 
Additionally, the Contractor shall provide a 610 mm (2 ft.) sample 
of each provided cable, to the RE and receive approval before 
installation. Cables installed in any outside location (i.e. above 
ground, under ground in conduit, ducts, pathways, etc.) shall be 
filled with a waterproofing compound between outside jacket (not 
immediately touching any provided armor) and inter conductors to 
seal punctures in the jacket and protect the conductors from 
moisture. 

1. Remote Control: 

a. The remote control cable shall be multi-conductor with stranded 
(solid is permissible) conductors. The cable shall be able to 
handle the power and voltage necessary to control specified 
system equipment from a remote location. The cable shall be UL 


listed and pass the FR-1 vertical flame test, at a minimum. Each 
conductor shall be color-coded. Combined multi-conductor and 
coaxial cables are acceptable for this installation, as long as 
all system performance standards are met. 

b. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Length 

As required, in 1K (3,000 ft.) reels 
minimum 

Connectors 

As required by system design 

Size 

18 AWG, minimum, Outside 

20 AWG, minimum, Inside 

Color coding 

Required, EIA industry standard 

Bend radius 

10X the cable outside diameter 

Impedance 

As required 

Shield coverage 

As required by OEM specification 

Attenuation 

 

Frequency in mHz 

dB per 305 M (1,000ft.), maximum 

0.7 

5.2 

1.0 

6.5 

4.0 

14.0 

8.0 

19.0 

16.0 

26.0 

20.0 

29.0 

25.0 

33.0 

31.0 

36.0 

50.0 

52.0 



 

2. Telephone: 

a. The System cable shall be provided by the Contractor to meet the 
minimum system requirements of Category Six service. The cable 
shall interconnect each part of the system. The cable shall be 
completely survivable in areas where it is installed. 

b. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Length 

As required, in 1K (3,000 ft.) reels 
minimum 

Cable 

Voice grade category six 




Connectors 

As required by system design 

Size 

22 AWG, minimum, Outside 

24 AWG, minimum, Inside 

Color coding 

Required, telephone industry standard 

Bend radius 

10X the cable outside diameter 

Impedance 

120 Ohms + 15%, BAL 

Shield coverage 

As required by OEM specification 

Attenuation 

 

Frequency in mHz 

dB per 305 M (1,000ft.), maximum 

0.7 

5.2 

1.0 

6.5 

4.0 

14.0 

8.0 

19.0 

16.0 

26.0 

20.0 

29.0 

25.0 

33.0 

31.0 

36.0 

62.0 

52.0 

100.0 

68.0 



 

3. Data Multi-Conductor: 

a. The cable shall be multi-conductor, shielded or unshielded cable 
with stranded conductors. The cable shall be able to handle the 
power and voltage used over the distance required. It shall meet 
Category Six service at a minimum. 

b. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Wire size 

22 AWG, minimum 

Working shield 

350 V 

Bend radius 

10X the cable outside diameter 

Impedance 

100 Ohms + 15%, BAL 

Bandwidth 

100 mHz, minimum 

DC RESISTANCE 

10.0 Ohms/100M, maximum 

Shield coverage 

 

Overall Outside (if OEM 
specified) 

100% 

Individual Pairs (if OEM 

100% 




specified) 

Attenuation 

 

Frequency in mHz 

dB per 305 M (1,000ft.), maximum 

0.7 

5.2 

1.0 

6.5 

4.0 

14.0 

8.0 

19.0 

16.0 

26.0 

20.0 

29.0 

25.0 

33.0 

31.0 

36.0 

62.0 

52.0 

100.0 

68.0 



 

4. AC Power Cable: AC power cable(s) shall be 3-conductor, no. 12 AWG 
minimum, and rated for 13A-125V and 1,625W. Master AC power, 
installation specification and requirements, are given in the NEC 
and herein. 

8. General Purpose Analog Video: 

a. The coaxial cable shall be an RG-59/U type (or equal), minimum. 
It may also be used for baseband signals as approved by the OEM. 

b. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Impedance 

75 Ohm, UNBAL 

Center conductor 

20 AWG, SOLID OR STRANDED COPPER 

Dielectric 

Cellular polyethylene 

Shield coverage 

95%, copper braid 

Connector type 

BNC or UHF 

Attenuation 

 

Frequency (k or mHz) 

Maximum dB/30.5M (100ft.) 

 10 kHz 

0.20 

 100 kHz 

0.22 

 1.0 kHz 

0.25 

 4.5 mHz 

0.85 

10.0 mHz 

1.40 

100 mHz 

5.00 // 



 


C. Outlet Connection Cables: 

1. Telephone: 

a. The Contractor shall provide a connection cable for each TCO 
telephone jack in the System with 10% spares. The telephone 
connection cable shall connect the telephone instrument to the 
TCO telephone jack. The Contractor shall not provide telephone 
instrument(s) or equipment. 

b. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Length 

1.8M (6ft.), minimum 

Cable 

Voice Grade 

Connector 

RJ-11/45 compatible male on each 
end 

Size 

24 AWG, minimum 

Color coding 

Required, telephone industry 
standard 



 

2. Data: 

a. The Contractor shall provide a connection cable for each TCO data 
jack in the system with 10% spares. The data connection cable 
shall connect a data instrument to the TCO data jack. The 
Contractor shall not provide data terminal(s)/equipment. 

b. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Length 

1.8M (6 ft.), minimum 

Cable 

Data grade Category Six 

Connector 

RJ-45 male on each end 

Color coding 

Required, data industry standard 

Size 

24 AWG, minimum 



 

 System Connectors: 

1. Solderless (Forked Connector): 

a. The connector shall have a crimp-on coupling for quick 
connect/disconnect of wires or cables. The crimp-on connector 
shall be designed to fit the wire or cable furnished. The 
connector barrel shall be insulated and color-coded. 

b. Technical Characteristics: 

 


Impedance 

As required 

Working Voltage 

500 V 



 

2. Multipin: 

a. The connector shall have a crimp-on coupling for quick 
connect/disconnect of wires or cables. The crimp-on connector 
shall be designed to fit the wire or cable furnished. The 
connector housing shall be fully enclosed and shielded. It shall 
be secured to the cable group by screw type compression sleeves. 

b. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Impedance 

As required 

Working Voltage 

500 V 

Number of pins 

As requires, usually 25 pairs minimum 



 

3. Modular (RJ-45/11 and RJ-45): The connectors shall be commercial 
types for voice and high speed data transmission applications. he 
connector shall be compatible with telephone instruments, computer 
terminals, and other type devices requiring linking through the 
modular telecommunications outlet to the System. The connector shall 
be compatible with UTP and STP cables. 

a. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Type 

Number of Pins 

RJ-11/45 

Compatible with RJ45 

RJ-45 

Eight 

Dielectric 

Surge 

Voltage 

1,000V RMS, 60 Hz @ one minute, 
minimum 

Current 

2.2A RMS @ 30 Minutes or 7.0A RMS @ 
5.0 seconds 

Leakage 

100 .A, maximum 

Connectability 

 

Initial contact 
resistance 

20 mili-Ohms, maximum 

Insulation displacement 

10 mili-Ohms, maximum 

Interface 

Must interface with modular jacks from 
a variety of OEMs. RJ-11/45 plugs 
shall provide connection when used in 




RJ-45 jacks. 

Durability 

200 insertions/withdrawals, minimum 



 

4. Fiber Optic: The connectors shall be commercial types for voice and 
high speed data transmission applications. The connector shall be 
compatible with telephone instruments, computer terminals, and other 
type devices requiring linking through the modular 
telecommunications outlet to the system. The connector shall be 
compatible with UTP and STP cables. 

 

E. Terminators: 

1. Coaxial: 

a. These units shall be metal-housed precision types in the 
frequency ranges selected. They shall be the screw-on type that 
has low VSWR when installed and the proper impedance to terminate 
the required system unit or coaxial cable. 

b. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Frequency 

0-1 GHz 

Power blocking 

As required 

Return loss 

25 dB 

Connectors 

“F”, "BNC", minimum 

Impedance 

50 or 75 Ohms, UNBAL 



 

2. Audio: 

a. These units shall be metal-housed precision types in the 
frequency ranges selected. They shall be the screw-on audio spade 
lug, twin plug, XL types that has low VSWR when installed and the 
proper impedance to terminate the required system unit or coaxial 
cable. 

b. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Frequency 

20-20 kHz, minimum 

Power blocking 

As required 

Return loss 

15 dB 

Connectors 

"Audio spade lug", “1/4”, “1/8”, "XL" or 
"RCA" 




Impedance 

 

Bal 

100 Ohms, minimum 

Unbal 

75 Ohm, minimum 



 

3. Fiber Optic: 

a. These units shall be metal-housed precision types in the 
frequency ranges selected. They shall be the screw-on type that 
has low VSWR when installed and the proper impedance to terminate 
the required system unit or fiber optic cable. 

b. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Frequency 

Lightwave 

Power blocking 

As required 

Return loss 

25 dB 

Connectors 

"ST", minimum 

Construction 

Stainless steel 

Impedance 

As required 



 

F. Distribution Frames: 

1. A new stand-alone (i.e., self supporting, free standing) MDF shall 
be provided to interconnect the EPBX and computer room. The MDF 
shall be modular and equipped with modular terminating mini blocks 
(i.e. Ericsson, 3M, etc.), and patch panels that are as small as 
possible and provide all the requirements of this specifications as 
described herein. 

2. All cable distribution closets and MDFs shall be wired in accordance 
with industry standards and shall employ "latest state-of-the-art" 
modular cross-connect devices. The MDF/telephone closet riser cable 
shall be sized to satisfy all voice requirements plus not less than 
50% spare (growth) capacity in each telephone closet which includes 
a fiber optic backbone. The MDF/telephone closet riser cable shall 
be sized to satisfy all voice and data requirements plus not less 
than 50% spare (growth) capacity in each telephone closet which does 
not include a fiber optic backbone. 

3. The MDF and all intermediate distribution frames shall be connected 
to the EPBX system ground. 


4. Technical Characteristics: 

 

Telephone 

 

IDC type unit 

As described in Part 2 

Contact wires 

50 micron of Gold over Nickel 

Contact pressure 

100 Grams, MIN 

110A Punch blocks 

Acceptable alternate to IDC 

Data 

110A blocks as described in Part 2 

Fiber optic 

Patch panel as described in Part 2 

Analog Video 

Patch panel as described in Part 2 



 

2.3 TELECOMMUNCATIONS CLOSET REQUIREMENTS 

Refer to VA Handbook H-088C3, Telephone System Requirements, for specific TC 
guidelines for size, power input, security, and backboard mounting 
requirements. It is the Contractors responsibility to ensure TC compliance 
with the System Requirements. 

2.4 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 

 Technical submittals shall identify the environmental specifications 
for housing the system. These environmental specifications shall 
identify the requirements for initial and expanded system 
configurations for: 

A. Floor loading for batteries and cabinets. 

B. Minimum floor space and ceiling heights. 

C. Minimum size of doors for equipment passage. 

D. Power requirements: The bidders shall provide the specific voltage, 
amperage, phases, and quantities of circuits required. 

E. Air conditioning, heating, and humidity requirements. The bidder shall 
identify the ambient temperature and relative humidity operating ranges 
required preventing equipment damage. 

F. Air conditioning requirements (expressed in BTU per hour, based on 
adequate dissipation of generated heat to maintain required room and 
equipment standards). 

G. Proposed floor plan based on the expanded system configuration of the 
bidder's proposed EPBX for this Facility. 

H. Conduit size requirement (between equipment room and console room). 


2.5 INSTALLATION KIT 

 The kit shall be provided that, at a minimum, includes all connectors 
and terminals, labeling systems, audio spade lugs, barrier strips, 
punch blocks or wire wrap terminals, heat shrink tubing, cable ties, 
solder, hangers, clamps, bolts, conduit, cable duct, and/or cable tray, 
etc., required to accomplish a neat and secure installation. All wires 
shall terminate in a spade lug and barrier strip, wire wrap terminal or 
punch block. Unfinished or unlabeled wire connections shall not be 
allowed. Turn over to the RE all unused and partially opened 
installation kit boxes, coaxial, fiberoptic, and twisted pair cable 
reels, conduit, cable tray, and/or cable duct bundles, wire rolls, 
physical installation hardware. The following are the minimum required 
installation sub-kits: 

A. System Grounding: 

1. The grounding kit shall include all cable and installation hardware 
required. All radio equipment shall be connected to earth ground via 
internal building wiring, according to the NEC. 

2. This includes, but is not limited to: 

a. Coaxial Cable Shields. 

b. Control Cable Shields. 

c. Data Cable Shields. 

d. Equipment Racks. 

e. Equipment Cabinets. 

f. Conduits. 

g. Duct. 

h. Cable Trays. 

i. Power Panels. 

j. Connector Panels. 

k. Grounding Blocks. 

B. Coaxial Cable: The coaxial cable kit shall include all coaxial 
connectors, cable tying straps, heat shrink tabbing, hangers, clamps, 
etc., required to accomplish a neat and secure installation. 

C. Wire and Cable: The wire and cable kit shall include all connectors and 
terminals, audio spade lugs, barrier straps, punch blocks, wire wrap 
strips, heat shrink tubing, tie wraps, solder, hangers, clamps, labels 
etc., required to accomplish a neat and orderly installation. 

D. Conduit, Cable Duct, and Cable Tray: The kit shall include all conduit, 
duct, trays, junction boxes, back boxes, cover plates, feed through 


nipples, hangers, clamps, other hardware required to accomplish a neat 
and secure conduit, cable duct, and/or cable tray installation in 
accordance with the NEC and this document. 

E. Equipment Interface: The equipment kit shall include any item or 
quantity of equipment, cable, mounting hardware and materials needed to 
interface the systems with the identified sub-system(s) according to 
the OEM requirements and this document. 

F. Labels: The labeling kit shall include any item or quantity of labels, 
tools, stencils, and materials needed to completely and correctly label 
each subsystem according to the OEM requirements, as-installed 
drawings, and this document. 

G. Documentation: The documentation kit shall include any item or 
quantity of items, computer discs, as installed drawings, equipment, 
maintenance, and operation manuals, and OEM materials needed to 
completely and correctly provide the system documentation as required 
by this document and explained herein. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION 

A. Product Delivery, Storage and Handling: 

1. Delivery: Deliver materials to the job site in OEM's original 
unopened containers, clearly labeled with the OEM's name and 
equipment catalog numbers, model and serial identification numbers. 
The RE may inventory the cable, patch panels, and related equipment. 

2. Storage and Handling: Store and protect equipment in a manner, which 
will preclude damage as directed by the RE. 

B. System Installation: 

1. After the contract’s been awarded, and within the time period 
specified in the contract, the Contractor shall deliver the total 
system in a manner that fully complies with the requirements of this 
specification. The Contractor shall make no substitutions or changes 
in the System without written approval from the RE and PM. 

2. The Contractor shall install all equipment and systems in a manner 
that complies with accepted industry standards of good practice, OEM 
instructions, the requirements of this specification, and in a 
manner which does not constitute a safety hazard. The Contractor 
shall insure that all installation personnel understands and 
complies with all the requirements of this specification. 


3. The Contractor shall install suitable filters, traps, directional 
couplers, splitters, TC’s, and pads for minimizing interference and 
for balancing the System. Items used for balancing and minimizing 
interference shall be able to pass telephone and data signals in the 
frequency bands selected, in the direction specified, with low loss, 
and high isolation, and with minimal delay of specified frequencies 
and signals. The Contractor shall provide all equipment necessary to 
meet the requirements of Paragraph 2.1.C and the System performance 
standards. 

4. All passive equipment shall be connected according to the OEM's 
specifications to insure future correct termination, isolation, 
impedance match, and signal level balance at each telephone/data 
outlet. 

5. Where TCOs are installed adjacent to each other, install one outlet 
for each instrument. 

6. All lines shall be terminated in a suitable manner to facilitate 
future expansion of the System. There shall be a minimum of one 
spare 25 pair cable at each distribution point on each floor. 

7. All vertical and horizontal copper and fiber optic , and coaxial 
cables shall be terminated so any future changes only requires 
modifications of the existing EPBX or signal closet equipment only. 

8. Terminating resistors or devices shall be used to terminate all 
unused branches, outlets, equipment ports of the System, and shall 
be devices designed for the purpose of terminating fiber optic or 
twisted pair cables carrying telephone and data signals in 
telephone and data systems. 

9. Equipment installed outdoors shall be weatherproof or installed in 
weatherproof enclosures with hinged doors and locks with two keys. 

10. Equipment installed indoors shall be installed in metal cabinets 
with hinged doors and locks with two keys. 

C. Conduit and Signal Ducts: 

1. Conduit: 

a. The Contractor shall employ the latest installation practices and 
materials. The Contractor shall provide conduit, junction boxes, 
connectors, sleeves, weatherheads, pitch pockets, and associated 
sealing materials not specifically identified in this document as 
GFE. Conduit penetrations of walls, ceilings, floors, 


interstitial space, fire barriers, etc., shall be sleeved and 
sealed. The minimum conduit size shall be 19 mm (3/4 in.). 

b. All cables shall be installed in separate conduit and/or signal 
ducts (exception from the separate conduit requirement to allow 
telephone cables to be installed in partitioned cable tray with 
data cables may be granted in writing by the RE if requested.) 
Conduits shall be provided in accordance with Section 27 05 33, 
RACEWAYS AND BOXES FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS, and NEC Articles 
517 for Critical Care and 800 for Communications systems, at a 
minimum. 

c. When metal, plastic covered, etc., flexible cable protective 
armor or systems are specifically authorized to be provided for 
use in the System, their installation guidelines and standards 
shall be as specified herein, Section 27 05 33, RACEWAYS AND 
BOXES FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS, and the NEC. 

d. When ”innerduct” flexible cable protective systems is 
specifically authorized to be provided for use in the System, 
it’s installation guidelines and standards shall be as the 
specified herein, Section 27 05 33, RACEWAYS AND BOXES FOR 
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS, and the NEC. 

e. Conduit (including GFE) fill shall not exceed 40%. Each conduit 
end shall be equipped with a protective insulator or sleeve to 
cover the conduit end, connection nut or clamp, to protect the 
wire or cable during installation and remaining in the conduit. 
Electrical power conduit shall be installed in accordance with 
the NEC. AC power conduit shall be run separate from signal 
conduit. 

f. When metal, plastic covered, etc., flexible cable protective 
armor or systems are specifically authorized to be provided for 
use in the System, their installation guidelines and standards 
shall be as specified herein, Section 27 05 33, RACEWAYS AND 
BOXES FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS, and the NEC. 

g. Ensure that Critical Care ----------- Nurse Call and PA, and 
Radio Paging Systems (as identified by NEC Section 517) are 
completely separated and protected from all other systems. 

2. Signal Duct, Cable Duct, or Cable Tray: 

a. The Contractor shall use existing signal duct, cable duct, and/or 
cable tray, when identified and approved by the RE. 


b. Approved signal and/or cable duct shall be a minimum size of 100 
mm x 100 mm (4 in. X 4 in.) inside diameter with removable tops 
or sides, as appropriate. Protective sleeves, guides or barriers 
are required on all sharp corners, openings, anchors, bolts or 
screw ends, junction, interface and connection points. 

c. Approved cable tray shall be fully covered, mechanically and 
physically partitioned for multiple electronic circuit use, and 
be UL certified and labeled for use with telecommunication 
circuits and/or systems. The RE shall approve width and height 
dimensions. 

D. Distribution System Signal Wires and Cables: 

1. Wires and cables shall be provided in the same manner and use like 
construction practices as Fire Protective and other Emergency 
Systems that are identified and outlined in NFPA 101, Life Safety 
Code, Chapters 7, 12, and/or 13, NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, 
Chapter 7, Special Conditions. The wires and cables shall be able to 
withstand adverse environmental conditions in their respective 
location without deterioration. Wires and cables shall enter each 
equipment enclosure, console, cabinet or rack in such a manner that 
all doors or access panels can be opened and closed without removal 
or disruption of the cables. 

a. Each wire and cable shall terminate on an item of equipment by 
direct connection. Spare or unused wire and cable shall be 
provided with appropriate connectors (female types) that are 
installed in appropriate punch blocks, barrier strips, patch, or 
bulkhead connector panels. 

b. Fiber optic cables that are spare, unused or dark shall be 
provided with Industry Standard “ST” type female connectors 
installed in appropriate break out, patch, or bulkhead connector 
panels provided in enclosure(s) and shall be protected from the 
environment. 

c. Coaxial cables that are spare, unused or dark shall be provided 
with the cable OEM specified type female connectors installed in 
appropriate break out, patch, or bulkhead connector panels 
provided in enclosure(s) and shall be protected from the 
environment. 

d. All cable junctions and taps shall be accessible. Provide an 8” 
X 8” X 4” (minimum) junction box attached to the cable duct or 


raceway for installation of distribution system passive 
equipment. Ensure all equipment and tap junctions are accessible. 

2. Routing and Interconnection: 

a. Wires or cables between consoles, cabinets, racks and other 
equipment shall be in an approved conduit, signal duct, cable 
duct, or cable tray that is secured to building structure. 

b. Wires and cables shall be insulated to prevent contact with 
signal or current carrying conductors. Wires or cables used in 
assembling consoles, panels, equipment cabinets and racks shall 
be formed into harnesses that are bundled and tied. Harnessed 
wires or cables shall be combed straight, formed and dressed in 
either a vertical or horizontal relationship to equipment, 
controls, components or terminations. 

c. Harnesses with intertwined members are not acceptable. Each wire 
or cable that breaks out from a harness for connection or 
termination shall have been tied off at that harness or bundle 
point, and be provided with a neatly formed service loop. 

d. Wires and cables shall be grouped according to service (i.e.: AC, 
grounds, signal, DC, control, etc.). DC, control and signal 
cables may be included with any group. Wires and cables shall be 
neatly formed and shall not change position in the group 
throughout the conduit run. Wires and cables in approved signal 
duct, conduit, cable ducts, or cable trays shall be neatly 
formed, bundled, tied off in 600 mm to 900 mm (24 in. to 36 in.) 
lengths and shall not change position in the group throughout the 
run. Concealed splices are not allowed. 

e. Separate, organize, bundle, and route wires or cables to restrict 
EMI, channel crosstalk, or feedback oscillation inside any 
enclosure. Looking at any enclosure from the rear (wall mounted 
enclosures, junction, pull or interface boxes from the front), 
locate AC power, DC and speaker wires or cables on the left; 
coaxial, control, microphone and line level audio and data wires 
or cables, on the right. This installation shall be accomplished 
with ties and/or fasteners that will not damage or distort the 
wires or cables. Limit spacing between tied off points to a 
maximum of 150 mm (6 inches). 

f. Do not pull wire or cable through any box, fitting or enclosure 
where change of cable tray or signal or cable duct alignment or 


direction occurs. Ensure the proper bend radius is maintained for 
each wire or cable as specified by it's OEM. 

g. Employ temporary guides, sheaves, rollers, and other necessary 
items to protect the wire or cable from excess tension or damage 
from bending during installation. Abrasion to wire or cable 
jackets is not acceptable and will not be allowed. Replace all 
cables whose jacket has been abraded. The discovery of any 
abraded and/or damaged cables during the proof of performance 
test shall be grounds for declaring the entire system 
unacceptable and the termination of the proof of performance 
test. Completely cover edges of wire or cable passing through 
holes in chassis, cabinets or racks, enclosures, pull or junction 
boxes, conduit, etc., with plastic or nylon grommeting. 

h. Cable runs shall be splice free between conduit junction and 
interface boxes and equipment locations. 

i. Cables shall be installed and fastened without causing sharp 
bends or rubbing of the cables against sharp edges. Cables shall 
be fastened with hardware that will not damage or distort them. 

j. Cables shall be labeled with permanent markers at the terminals 
of the electronic and passive equipment and at each junction 
point in the System. The lettering on the cables shall correspond 
with the lettering on the record diagrams. 

k. Completely test all of the cables after installation and replace 
any defective cables. 

l. Wires or cables that are installed outside of buildings shall be 
in conduit, secured to solid building structures. If specifically 
approved, on a case by case basis, to be run outside of conduit, 
the wires or cables shall be installed, as described herein. The 
bundled wires or cables must: Be tied at not less than 460 mm (18 
in.) intervals to a solid building structure; have ultra violet 
protection and be totally waterproof (including all connections). 
The laying of wires or cables directly on roof tops, ladders, 
drooping down walls, walkways, floors, etc. is not allowed and 
will not be approved. 

m. Wires or cables installed outside of conduit, cable trays, 
wireways, cable duct, etc. 

1) Only when specifically authorized as described herein, will 
wires or cables be identified and approved to be installed 


outside of conduit. The wire or cable runs shall be UL rated 
plenum and OEM certified for use in air plenums. 

2) Wires and cables shall be hidden, protected, fastened and tied 
at 600 mm (24 in.) intervals, maximum, as described herein to 
building structure. 

3) Closer wire or cable fastening intervals may be required to 
prevents sagging, maintain clearance above suspended ceilings, 
remove unsightly wiring and cabling from view and discourage 
tampering and vandalism. Wire or cable runs, not provided in 
conduit, that penetrate outside building walls, supporting 
walls, and two hour fire barriers shall be sleeved and sealed 
with an approved fire retardant sealant. 

4) Wire or cable runs to system components installed in walls 
(i.e.: volume attenuators, circuit controllers, signal, or 
data outlets, etc.) may, when specifically authorized by the 
RE, be fished through hollow spaces in walls and shall be 
certified for use in air plenum areas. 

n. Wires or cables installed in underground conduit, duct, etc. 

1) Wires or cables installed in underground installations shall 
be waterproofed by the inclusion of a water protective barrier 
(i.e. gel, magma, etc.) or flooding compound between the 
outside jacket and first shield. Each underground connection 
shall be accessible in a manhole, recessed ground level 
junction box, above ground pedestal, etc., and shall be 
provided with appropriate waterproof connectors to match the 
cable being installed. Once the System has been tested and 
found to meet the System performance standards and accepted by 
VA, the Contractor shall provide waterproof shrink tubing or 
approved mastic to fully encompass each wire or cable 
connection and overlay at least 150 mm (6 inches) above each 
wire or cable jacket trim point. 

2) It is not acceptable to connect waterproofed cable directly to 
an inside CCS punch block or directly to an equipment 
connection port. When an under ground cable enters a building, 
it shall be routed directly to the closest TC that has been 
designated as the building’s IMTC. The Contractor shall 
provide a “transition” splice in this TC where the “water 
proofed” cable enters on one side and “dry” cable exits on the 


other side. The “transition” splice shall be fully waterproof 
and be capable of reentry for system servicing. Additionally, 
the transition splice shall not allow the waterproofing 
compound to migrate from the water proof cable to the dry 
cable. 

3) Warning tape shall be continuously placed 300 mm (12 inches) 
above buried conduit, cable, etc. 

E. Outlet Boxes, Back Boxes, and Faceplates: 

1. Outlet Boxes: Signal, power, interface, connection, distribution, 
and junction boxes shall be provided as required by the system 
design, on-site inspection, and review of the contract drawings. 

2. Back Boxes: Back boxes shall be provided as directed by the OEM as 
required by the approved system design, on-site inspection, and 
review of the contract drawings. 

3. Face Plates (or Cover Plates): Faceplates shall be of a standard 
type, stainless steel, anodized aluminum or UL approved cycolac 
plastic construction and provided by the Contractor for each 
identified system outlet location. Connectors and jacks appearing on 
the faceplate shall be clearly and permanently marked. 

F. Connectors: Circuits, transmission lines, and signal extensions shall 
have continuity, correct connection and polarity. A uniform polarity 
shall be maintained between all points in the system. 

1. Wires: 

a. Wire ends shall be neatly formed and where insulation has been 
cut, heat shrink tubing shall be employed to secure the 
insulation on each wire. Tape of any type is not acceptable. 

b. Audio spade lugs shall be installed on each wire (including spare 
or unused) end and connect to screw terminals of appropriate size 
barrier strips. AC barrier strips shall be provided with a 
protective cover to prevent accidental contact with wires 
carrying live AC current. Punch blocks are approved for signal, 
not AC wires. Wire Nut or "Scotch Lock" connectors are not 
acceptable for signal wire installation. 

2. Cables: Each connector shall be designed for the specific size cable 
being used and installed with the OEM's approved installation tool. 
Typical system cable connectors include; but, are not limited to: 
Audio spade lug, punch block, wirewrap, etc. 


3. Line or Microphone Audio: Each connector shall be installed 
according to the cable or connector OEM's instructions and use the 
OEM's approved installation tool. Install the connector's to provide 
and maintain the following audio signal polarity: 

a. XLR type connectors Signal or positive conductor is pin 3; common 
or neutral conductor is pin 2; ground conductor is pin 1. 

b. Two and 3 conductor 1/4" Signal or positive conductor is tip; 
neutral or 1/8" phono plugs conductor is ring and ground or 
shield and jacks conductor is sleeve. 

c. RCA Phono Plugs the Signal or positive conductor is tip; and 
Jacks neutral or shield conductor is sleeve. 

4. Speaker Line Audio: 

a. Each connector shall be installed according to the cable, 
transformer or speaker OEM instructions and using the OEM's 
approved installation tool. The Contractor shall ensure each 
speaker is properly phased and connected in the same manner 
throughout the System using two conductor type wires. 

b. One of the conductors shall be color coded to aid in establishing 
speaker signal polarity. Each speaker line shall be permanently 
soldered or audio spade lug connected to each appropriate speaker 
or line matching transformer connection terminal. Speaker line 
connection to each audio amplifier shall use audio spade lugs, as 
described herein. 

G. AC Power: AC power wiring shall be run separately from signal cable. 

H. Grounding: 

1. General: The Contractor shall ground all Contractor Installed 
Equipment and identified Government Furnished Equipment to eliminate 
all shock hazards and to minimize, to the maximum extent possible, 
all ground loops, common mode returns, noise pickup, crosstalk, etc. 
The total ground resistance shall be 0.1 Ohm or less. 

a. The Contractor shall install lightning arrestors and grounding in 
accordance with the NFPA and this specification. 

b. Under no conditions shall the AC neutral, either in a power panel 
or in a receptacle outlet, be used for system control, subcarrier 
or audio reference ground. 

c. The use of conduit, signal duct or cable trays as system or 
electrical ground is not acceptable and will not be permitted. 
These items may be used only for the dissipation of internally 


generated static charges (not to be confused with externally 
generated lightning) that may applied or generated outside the 
mechanical and/or physical confines of the System to earth 
ground. The discovery of improper system grounding shall be 
grounds to declare the System unacceptable and the termination of 
all system acceptance testing. 

2. Cabinet Buss: A common ground buss of at least #10 AWG solid copper 
wire shall extend throughout each equipment cabinet and be connected 
to the system ground. Provide a separate isolated ground connection 
from each equipment cabinet ground buss to the system ground. Do not 
tie equipment ground busses together. 

3. Equipment: Equipment shall be bonded to the cabinet bus with copper 
braid equivalent to at least #12 AWG. Self grounding equipment 
enclosures, racks or cabinets, that provide OEM certified functional 
ground connections through physical contact with installed 
equipment, are acceptable alternates. 

4. Cable Shields: Cable shields shall be bonded to the cabinet ground 
buss with #12 AWG minimum stranded copper wire at only one end of 
the cable run. Cable shields shall be insulated from each other, 
faceplates, equipment racks, consoles, enclosures or cabinets; 
except, at the system common ground point. Coaxial and audio cables, 
shall have one ground connection at the source; in all cases, cable 
shield ground connections shall be kept to a minimum. 

I. Labeling: Provide labeling in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA-606-A. All 
lettering for voice and data circuits shall be stenciled using laser 
printers. Handwritten labels are not acceptable. 

1. Cable and Wires (Hereinafter referred to as “Cable”): Cables shall 
be labeled at both ends in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA-606-A. 
Labels shall be permanent in contrasting colors. Cables shall be 
identified according to the System “Record Wiring Diagrams”. 

2. Equipment: System equipment shall be permanently labeled with 
contrasting plastic laminate or bakelite material. System equipment 
shall be labeled on the face of the unit corresponding to its 
source. 

3. Conduit, Cable Duct, and/or Cable Tray: The Contractor shall label 
all conduit, duct and tray, including utilized GFE, with permanent 
marking devices or spray painted stenciling a minimum of 3 meters 


(10 ft.) identifying it as the System. In addition, each enclosure 
shall be labeled according to this standard. 

4. Termination Hardware: The Contractor shall label workstation outlets 
and patch panel connections using color coded labels with 
identifiers in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA-606-A and the “Record 
Wiring Diagrams”. 

3.2 TESTS 

A. Interim Inspection: 

1. This inspection shall verify that the equipment provided adheres to 
the installation requirements of this document. The interim 
inspection will be conducted by a factory-certified representative 
and witnessed by a Government Representative. Each item of installed 
equipment shall be checked to insure appropriate UL certification 
markings. This inspection shall verify cabling terminations in 
telecommunications rooms and at workstations adhere to color code 
for T568A pin assignments and cabling connections are in compliance 
with ANSI/EIA/TIA standards. Visually confirm Category 6 marking of 
outlets, faceplates, outlet/connectors and patch cords. 

2. Perform fiber optical field inspection tests via attenuation 
measurements on factory reels and provide results along with 
manufacturer certification for factory reel tests. Remove failed 
cable reels from project site upon attenuation test failure. 

3. The Contractor shall notify the RE, in writing, of the estimated 
date the Contractor expects to be ready for the interim inspection, 
at least 20 working days before the requested inspection date. 

4. Results of the interim inspection shall be provided to the RE and 
PM. If major or multiple deficiencies are discovered, a second 
interim inspection may be required before permitting the Contractor 
to continue with the system installation. 

5. The COR and/or the PM shall determine if an additional inspection is 
required, or if the Contractor will be allowed to proceed with the 
installation. In either case, re-inspection of the deficiencies 
noted during the interim inspection(s), will be part of the proof of 
performance test. The interim inspection shall not affect the 
Systems’ completion date. The Contracting Officer shall ensure all 
test documents will become a part of the Systems record 
documentation. 


B. Pretesting: 


1. Upon completing the installation of the System, the Contractor shall 
align and balance the system. The Contractor shall pretest the 
entire system. 

2. Pretesting Procedure: 

a. During the system pretest, the Contractor shall verify (utilizing 
the approved spectrum analyzer and test equipment) that the 
System is fully operational and meets all the system performance 
requirements of this standard. 

b. The Contractor shall pretest and verify that all System functions 
and specification requirements are met and operational, no 
unwanted aural effects, such as signal distortion, noise pulses, 
glitches, audio hum, poling noise, etc. are present. The 
Contractor shall measure and record the aural carrier levels of 
each system telephone and data channel, at each of the following 
points in the system: 

1) Local Telephone Company Interfaces or Inputs. 

2) EPBX interfaces or inputs and outputs. 

3) MDF interfaces or inputs and outputs. 

4) EPBX output S/NR for each telephone and data channel. 

5) Signal Level at each interface point to the distribution 
system, the last outlet on each trunk line plus all outlets 
installed as part of this contract. 

3. The Contractor shall provide four (4) copies of the recorded system 
pretest measurements and the written certification that the System 
is ready for the formal acceptance test shall be submitted to the 
RE. 

C. Acceptance Test: After the System has been pretested and the Contractor 
has submitted the pretest results and certification to the RE, then the 
Contractor shall schedule an acceptance test date and give the RE 30 
days written notice prior to the date the acceptance test is expected 
to begin. The System shall be tested in the presence of a Government 
Representative and an OEM certified representative. The System shall be 
tested utilizing the approved test equipment to certify proof of 
performance and Life Safety compliance. The test shall verify that the 
total System meets the requirements of this specification. The 
notification of the acceptance test shall include the expected length 
(in time) of the test. 

D. Verification Tests: 


1. Test the UTP backbone copper cabling for DC loop resistance, shorts, 
opens, intermittent faults, and polarity between conductors, and 
between conductors and shield, if cable has an overall shield. Test 
the operation of shorting bars in connection blocks. Test cables 
after termination and prior to cross-connection. 

2. Multimode Fiber Optic Cable: Perform end-to-end attenuation tests in 
accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA-568-B.3 and ANSI/EIA/TIA-526-14A using 
OTDR. Perform verification acceptance test. 

3. Single mode Fiber Optic Cable: Perform end-to-end attenuation tests 
in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA-568-B.3 and ANSI/EIA/TIA-526-7 using 
OTDR. Perform verification acceptance test. 

E. Performance Testing: 

1. Perform Category 6 tests in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA-568-B.1 and 
ANSI/EIA/TIA-568-B.2. Test shall include the following: wire map, 
length, insertion loss, return loss, NEXT, PSNEXT, ELFEXT, PSELFEXT, 
propagation delay and delay skew. 

2. Fiber Optic Links: Perform end-to-end fiber optic cable link tests 
in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA-568-B.3. 

F. Total System Acceptance Test: The Contractor shall perform verification 
tests for UTP copper cabling system(s) and the multimode and single 
mode fiber optic cabling system(s) after the complete telecommunication 
distribution system and workstation outlet are installed. 

1. Voice Testing: Connect to the network interface device at the 
demarcation point. Go off-hook and receive dial tone from the LEC. 
If a test number is available, place and receive a local, long 
distance, and FTS telephone call. 

2. Data Testing: Connect to the network interface device at the 
demarcation point. Log onto the network to ensure proper connection 
to the network is achieved. 

3.3 TRAINING 

A. Furnish the services of a factory-trained engineer or technician for a 
total of two four hour classes to instruct designated Facility IRM 
personnel. Instruction shall include cross connection, corrective, and 
preventive maintenance of the System and equipment. 

B. Before the System can be accepted by the VA, this training must be 
accomplished. Training will be scheduled at the convenience of the 
Facilities Contracting Officer and Chief of Engineering Service. 


3.4 WARRANTY 

A. Comply with FAR clause 52.246-21, except that warranty shall be as 
follows: 

1. The Contractor shall warranty that all installed material and 
equipment will be free from defects, workmanship, and will remain so 
for a period of one year from date of final acceptance of the System 
by the VA. The Contractor shall provide OEM’s equipment warranty 
documents, to the RE (or Facility Contracting Officer if the 
Facility has taken procession of the building(s)), that certifies 
each item of equipment installed conforms to OEM published 
specifications. 

2. The Contractor's maintenance personnel shall have the ability to 
contact the Contractor and OEM for emergency maintenance and 
logistic assistance, remote diagnostic testing, and assistance in 
resolving technical problems at any time. The Contractor and OEM 
shall provide this contact capability at no additional cost to the 
VA. 

3. All Contractor installation, maintenance, and supervisor personnel 
shall be fully qualified by the OEM and must provide two (2) copies 
of current and qualified OEM training certificates and OEM 
certification upon request. 

4. Additionally, the Contractor shall accomplish the following minimum 
requirements during the one year warranty period: 

a. Response Time: 

1) The RE (or facility Contracting Officer if the facility has 
taken possession of the building[s]) are the Contractor’s 
reporting and contact officials for the System trouble calls, 
during the warranty period. 

2) A standard workweek is considered 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M., 
Monday through Friday exclusive of Federal Holidays. 

3) The Contractor shall respond and correct on-site trouble 
calls, during the standard work week to: 

a) A routine trouble call within one working days of its 
report. A routine trouble is considered a trouble which 
causes a system outlet, station, or patch cord to be 
inoperable. 

b) An emergency trouble call within 6 hours of its report. An 
emergency trouble is considered a trouble which causes a 


subsystem or distribution point to be inoperable at 
anytime. Additionally, the loss of a minimum of 50 station 
or system lines shall be deemed as this type of a trouble 
call. 

4) The Contractor shall respond on-site to a catastrophic trouble 
call within 4 hours of its report. A catastrophic trouble call 
is considered total system failure. 

a) If a system failure cannot be corrected within four hours 
(exclusive of the standard work time limits), the 
Contractor shall be responsible for providing alternate 
system CSS or TCO equipment, or cables. The alternate 
equipment and/or cables shall be operational within four 
hours after the four hour trouble shooting time. 

b) Routine or emergency trouble calls in critical emergency 
health care facilities (i.e., cardiac arrest, intensive 
care units, etc.) shall also be deemed as a catastrophic 
trouble call if so determined by the RE or Facility 
Director. The RE or Facility Contracting Officer shall 
notify the Contractor of this type of trouble call at the 
direction of the Facilities Director. 

b. Required on-site visits during the one year warranty period 

1) The Contractor shall visit, on-site, for a minimum of eight 
hours, once every 12 weeks, during the warranty period, to 
perform system preventive maintenance, equipment cleaning, and 
operational adjustments to maintain the System according the 
descriptions identified in this SPEC. 

a) The Contractor shall arrange all Facility visits with the 
RE or Facility Contracting Officer prior to performing the 
required maintenance visits. 

b) The Contractor in accordance with the OEM’s recommended 
practice and service intervals shall perform preventive 
maintenance during a non-busy time agreed to by the RE or 
Facility Contracting Officer and the Contractor. 

c) The preventive maintenance schedule, functions and reports 
shall be provided to and approved by the RE or Facility 
Contracting Officer. 

2) The Contractor shall provide the RE or Facility Contracting 
Officer a type written report itemizing each deficiency found 


and the corrective action performed during each required visit 
or official reported trouble call. The Contractor shall 
provide the RE with sample copies of these reports for review 
and approval at the beginning of the Total System Acceptance 
Test. The following reports are the minimum required: 

a) Monthly Report: The Contractor shall provide a monthly 
summary all equipment and sub-systems serviced during this 
warranty period to RE or Facilities Contracting Officer by 
the fifth working day after the end of each month. The 
report shall clearly and concisely describe the services 
rendered, parts replaced and repairs performed. The report 
shall prescribe anticipated future needs of the equipment 
and Systems for preventive and predictive maintenance 

b) Contractor Log: The Contractor shall maintain a separate 
log entry for each item of equipment and each sub-system of 
the System. The log shall list dates and times of all 
scheduled, routine, and emergency calls. Each emergency 
call shall be described with details of the nature and 
causes of emergency steps taken to rectify the situation 
and specific recommendations to avoid such conditions in 
the future. 

3) The RE or Facility Contracting Officer shall provide the 
Facility Engineering Officer, two (2) copies of actual reports 
for evaluation. 

a) The RE or Facility Contracting Officer shall ensure copies 
of these reports are entered into the System’s official 
acquisition documents. 

b) The Facilities Chief Engineer shall ensure copies of these 
reports are entered into the System’s official technical 
as-installed documents. 

B. Work Not Included: Maintenance and repair service shall not include the 
performance of any work due to improper use, accidents, other vendor, 
contractor, owner tampering or negligence, for which the Contractor is 
not directly responsible and does not control. The Contractor shall 
immediately notify the RE or Facility Contracting Officer in writing 
upon the discovery of these incidents. The RE or Facility Contracting 
Officer will investigate all reported incidents and render findings 
concerning any Contractor’s responsibility. 



- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 27 52 23 
NURSE CALL AND CODE BLUE SYSTEMS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 SECTION SUMMARY 

A. Work covered by this document includes design, engineering, labor, 
material and products, equipment warranty and system warranty, training 
and services for, and incidental to, the complete installation of new 
and fully operating National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) – Life 
Safety Code 101.3-2 (a) Labeled and (b) Listed, Emergency Service 
Nurse-Call and/or Life Safety listed Code Blue Communication System and 
associated equipment (here-in-after referred to as the System) provided 
in approved locations indicated on the contract drawings. These items 
shall be tested and certified capable of receiving, distributing, 
interconnecting and supporting Nurse-Call and/or Code Blue 
communications signals generated local and remotely as detailed herein. 

B. Work shall be complete, Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA), National Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL – i.e. 
Underwriters Laboratory [UL]) Listed and Labeled; and VA Central 
Office (VACO), Telecommunications Voice Engineering (TVE 005OP3B) 
tested, certified and ready for operation. 

C. The System shall be delivered free of engineering, manufacturing, 
installation, and functional defects. It shall be designed, engineered 
and installed for ease of operation, maintenance, and testing. 

D. The term “provide”, as used herein, shall be defined as: designed, 
engineered, furnished, installed, certified, tested, and warranty by 
the Contractor. 

E. Specification Order of Precedence: In the event of a conflict between 
the text of this document and the Project’s Contract Drawings outlined 
and/or cited herein; THE TEXT OF THIS DOCUMENT TAKES PRECEDENCE. 
HOWEVER, NOTHING IN THIS DOCUMENT WILL SUPERSEDE APPLICABLE EMERGENCY 
LAWS AND REGULATIONS, SPECIFICALLY NATIONAL AND/OR LOCAL LIFE AND 
PUBLIC SAFETY CODES. The Local Fire Marshall and/or VA Public Safety 
Officer are the only authorities that may modify this document’s 
EMERGENCY CODE COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS, on a case by case basis, in 
writing and confirmed by VA’s Project Manager (PM), Resident Engineer 
(RE) and TVE-005OP3B. The VA PM is the only approving authority for 
other amendments to this document that may be granted, on a case by 


case basis, in writhing with technical concurrencies by VA’s PM, RE, 
TVE-005OP3B and identified Facility Project Personnel. 

F. The Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) and Contractor shall ensure 
that all management, sales, engineering and installation personnel have 
read and understand the requirements of this specification before the 
system is designed, engineered, delivered and provided. The Contractor 
shall furnish a written statement stating this requirement as a part of 
the technical submittal that includes each name and certification, 
including the OEMs. The Contractor is cautioned to obtain in writing, 
all approvals for system changes relating to the published contract 
specifications and drawings, from the PM and/or the RE before 
proceeding with the change. 

1.2 RELATED SECTIONS 

A. 01 33 23 – Shop Drawings, Product Data and Samples. 

B. 07 84 00 – Firestopping. 

C. 26 05 21 – Low – Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables (600 
Volts and Below). 

E. 27 05 11 – Requirements for Communications Installations. 

F. 27 05 26 – Grounding and Bonding for Communications Systems. 

G. 27 05 33 – Raceways and Boxes for Communications Systems. 

H. 27 10 00 – TIP Structured Communications Systems Cabling. 

I. 27 11 00 – TIP Communications Interface and Equipment Rooms Fittings. 

J. 27 15 00 – TIP Communications Horizontal and Vertical Cabling. 

1.3 DEFINITION 

A. Provide: Design, engineer, furnish, install, connect complete, test, 
certify and warranty. 

B. Work: Materials furnished and completely installed. 

C. Review of contract drawings: A service by the engineer to reduce the 
possibility of materials being ordered which do not comply with 
contract documents. The engineer's review shall not relieve the 
Contractor of responsibility for dimensions or compliance with the 
contract documents. The reviewer's failure to detect an error does not 
constitute permission for the Contractor to proceed in error. 

D. Headquarters (aka VACO) Technical Review, for National and VA 
Communications and Security, Codes, Frequency Licensing Standards, 
Guidelines and Compliance: 

Office of Telecommunications 

Special Communications Team (005OP3B) 


1335 East West Highway – 3rd Floor 

Silver Spring, Maryland 20910, 

(O) 301-734-0350, (F) 301-734-0360 

E. Engineer: BES Design/Build, LLC 

 204 Rogosin Drive, Suite #2 

 Elizabethton, TN 37643 

 423.202.3825 phone 

F. Owner: // XXXXXXX // 

G. General Contractor (GC): // XXXXXXX // 

H. Contractor: Systems Contractor; you; successful bidder. 

1.4 REFERENCES 

A. The installation shall comply fully with all governing authorities, 
laws and ordinances, regulations, codes and standards, including, but 
not limited to: 

1. United States Federal Law: 

a. Departments of: 

1) Commerce, Consolidated Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 15 – 
Under the Information Technology Management Reform Act (Public 
Law 104-106), the Secretary of Commerce approves standards and 
guidelines that are developed by the: 

a) Chapter II, National Institute of Standards Technology 
(NIST – formerly the National Bureau of Standards). Under 
Section 5131 of the Information Technology Management 
Reform Act of 1996 and the Federal Information Security 
Management Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-347), NIST develops 
– Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 
(FIPS) 140-2—Security Requirements for Cryptographic 
Modules. 

b) Chapter XXIII, National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (NTIA – aka ‘Red Book’) Chapter 7.8 / 9; 
CFR, Title 47 Federal communications Commission (FCC) Part 
15, Radio Frequency Restriction of Use and Compliance in 
“Safety of Life” Functions & Locations. 

2) FCC - Communications Act of 1934, as amended, CFR, Title 47 – 
Telecommunications, in addition to Part 15 – Restrictions of 
use for Part 15 listed Radio Equipment in Safety of Life / 
Emergency Functions / Equipment/ Locations (also see CFR, 
Title 15 – Department of Commerce, Chapter XXIII – NTIA): 


a) Part 15 – Restrictions of use for Part 15 listed Radio 
Equipment in Safety of Life / Emergency Functions / 
Equipment/Locations. 

b) Part 58 – Television Broadcast Service. 

c) Part 90 – Rules and Regulations, Appendix C. 

3) Health, (Public Law 96-88), CFR, Title 42, Chapter IV Health & 
Human Services, CFR, Title 46, Subpart 1395(a)(b) JCAHO “a 
hospital that meets JCAHO accreditation is deemed to meet the 
Medicare conditions of Participation by meeting Federal 
Directives:” 

a) All guidelines for Life, Personal and Public Safety; and, 
Essential and Emergency Communications. 

4) Labor, CFR, Title 29, Part 1910, Chapter XVII - Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), Occupational Safety 
and Health Standard: 

a) Subpart 7 - Definition and requirements (for a NRTL – 15 
Laboratory’s, for complete list, contact 
(http://www.osha.gov/dts/otpca/nrtl/faq_nrtl.html): 

1) UL: 

 a) 44-02 – Standard for Thermoset-Insulated Wires and 

 Cables. 

 b) 65 – Standard for Wired Cabinets. 

 c) 83-03 – Standard for Thermoplastic-Insulated Wires 

 and Cables. 

 d) 467-01 – Standard for Electrical Grounding and 

 Bonding Equipment 

 e) 468 – Standard for Grounding and Bonding Equipment. 

 f) 486A-01 – Standard for Wire Connectors and Soldering 

 Lugs for Use with Copper Conductors 

 g) 486C-02 – Standard for Splicing Wire Connectors. 

 h) 486D-02 – Standard for Insulated Wire Connector 

 Systems for Underground Use or in Damp or Wet 

 Locations. 

 i) 486E-00 – Standard for Equipment Wiring Terminals for 

 Use with Aluminum and/or Copper Conductors. 

 j) 493-01 – Standard for Thermoplastic-Insulated 

 Underground Feeder and Branch Circuit Cable. 

 k) 514B-02 – Standard for Fittings for Cable and 


 Conduit. 

 l) 1069 – Hospital Signaling and Nurse Call Equipment. 

 m) 1449 – Standard for Transient Voltage Surge 

 Suppressors. 

 n) 1479-03 – Standard for Fire Tests of Through- 

 Penetration Fire Stops. 

 o) 1666 – Standard for Wire/Cable Vertical (Riser) Tray 

 Flame Tests. 

 p) 1863 – Standard for Safety, Communications Circuits 

 Accessories. 

 q) 2024 – Standard for Optical Fiber Raceways. 

 r) 60950-1/2 – Information Technology Equipment – 

 Safety. 

2) Canadian Standards Association (CSA): same tests as for 

 UL. 

3) Communications Certifications Labatory (CCL): same tests 

 as for UL. 

4) Intertek Testing Services NA, Inc. (ITSNA formerly 

 Edison Testing Laboratory [ETL]): same tests as for UL. 

b) Subpart 35 – Compliance with NFPA 101 – Life Safety Code. 

c) Subpart 36 - Design and construction requirements for exit 
routes. 

d) Subpart 268 - Telecommunications. 

e) Subpart 305 - Wiring methods, components, and equipment 
for general use. 

5) Department of Transportation, CFR, Title 49 (Public Law 89- 
670), Part 1, Subpart C – Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA): 

a) Standards AC 110/460-ID & AC 707 / 460-2E – Advisory 

 Circulars for Construction of Antenna Towers. 

b) Forms 7450 and 7460-2 – Antenna Construction Registration. 

6) Veterans Affairs (Public Law No. 100-527), CFR, Title 38, 
Volumes I & II: 

a) Office of Telecommunications: 

1) Handbook 6100 – Telecommunications. 

 a) Spectrum Management FCC & NTIA Radio Frequency 

 Compliance and Licensing Program. 

 b) Special Communications Proof of Performance Testing, 


 VACO Compliance and Life Safety Certification(s). 

b) Office of Cyber and Information Security (OCIS): 

1) Handbook 6500 - Information Security Program. 

2) Wireless and Handheld Device Security Guideline Version 

 3.2, August 15, 2005. 

c) VA’s National Center for Patient Safety – Veterans Health 
Administration Warning System, Failure of Medical Alarm 
Systems using Paging Technology to Notify Clinical Staff, 
July 2004. 

d) VA’s Center for Engineering Occupational Safety and Health, 
concurrence with warning identified in VA Directive 7700. 

e) Office of Construction and Facilities Management (CFM): 

1) Master Construction Specifications (PG-18-1). 

2) Standard Detail and CAD Standards (PG-18-4). 

3) Equipment Guide List (PG-18-5). 

4) Electrical Design Manual for VA Facilities (PG 18-10), 

 Articles 7 & 8. 

5) Minimum Requirements of A/E Submissions (PG 18-15): 

 a) Volume B, Major New Facilities, Major Additions; and 

 Major Renovations, Article VI, Paragraph B. 

 b) Volume C - Minor and NRM Projects, Article III, 

 Paragraph S. 

 c) Volume E - Request for Proposals Design/Build 

 Projects, Article II, Paragraph F. 

6) Mission Critical Facilities Design Manual (Final Draft – 

 2007). 

7) Life Safety Protected Design Manual (Final Draft – 

 2007). 

8) Solicitation for Offerors (SFO) for Lease Based Clinics 

 – (05-2009). 

b. Federal Specifications (Fed. Specs.): 

1) A-A-59544-00 - Cable and Wire, Electrical (Power, Fixed 
Installation). 

2. National Codes: 

a. American Institute of Architects (AIA): Guidelines for Healthcare 
Facilities. 


b. American National Standards Institute/Electronic Industries 
Association/Telecommunications Industry Association 
(ANSI/EIA/TIA): 

1) 568-B - Commercial Building Telecommunications Wiring 
Standards: 

a) B-1 – General Requirements. 

b) B-2 – Balanced twisted-pair cable systems. 

c) B-3 - Fiber optic cable systems. 

2) 569 - Commercial Building Standard for Telecommunications 
Pathways and Spaces. 

3) 606 – Administration Standard for the Telecommunications 
Infrastructure of Communications Buildings. 

4) 607 – Commercial Building Grounding and Bonding Requirements 
for Telecommunications. 

5) REC 127-49 – Power Supplies. 

6) RS 270 – Tools, Crimping, Solderless Wiring Devices, 
Recommended Procedures for User Certification. 

c. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): 

1) Standard 17.4 – Guide for Emergency Personnel. 

2) Standard 17.5 – Elevator & Escalator Equipment (prohibition of 
installing non-elevator equipment in Elevator Equipment Room / 
Mechanical Penthouse). 

d. American Society of Testing Material (ASTM): 

1) D2301-04 - Standard Specification for Vinyl Chloride Plastic 
Pressure Sensitive Electrical Insulating Tape. 

e. Building Industries Communications Services Installation (BICSI): 

1) All standards for smart building wiring, connections and 
devices for commercial and medical facilities. 

2) Structured Building Cable Topologies. 

3) In consort with ANSI/EIA/TIA. 

f. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE): 

1) SO/TR 21730:2007 - Use of mobile wireless communication and 
computing technology in healthcare facilities - 
Recommendations for electromagnetic compatibility (management 
of unintentional electromagnetic interference) with medical 
devices. 

2) 0739-5175/08/©2008 IEEE – Medical Grade – Mission Critical – 
Wireless Networks. 


3) C62.41 – Surge Voltages in Low-Voltage AC Power Circuits. 

g. NFPA: 

1) 70 - National Electrical Code (current date of issue) – 
Articles 517, 645 & 800. 

2) 75 - Standard for Protection of Electronic Computer Data- 
Processing Equipment. 

3) 77 – Recommended Practice on Static Electricity. 

4) 99 - Healthcare Facilities. 

5) 101 - Life Safety Code. 

3. State Hospital Code(s). 

4. Local Town, City and/or County Codes. 

5. Accreditation Organization(s): 

a. Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals Organization 
(JCAHO) – Section VI, Part 3a – Operating Features. 

1.5 QUALIFICATIONS 

A. The OEM shall have had experience with three (3) or more installations 
of Nurse Call systems of comparable size and interfacing complexity 
with regards to type and design as specified herein. Each of these 
installations shall have performed satisfactorily for at least one (1) 
year after final acceptance by the user. Include the names, locations 
and point of contact for these installations as a part of the 
submittal. 

B. The Contractor shall submit certified documentation that they have been 
an authorized distributor and service organization for the OEM for a 
minimum of three (3) years. The Contractor shall be authorized by the 
OEM to pass thru the OEM’s warranty of the installed equipment to VA. 
In addition, the OEM and Contractor shall accept complete 
responsibility for the design, installation, certification, operation, 
and physical support for the System. This documentation, along with 
the System Contractor and OEM certifications must be provided in 
writing as part of the Contractor’s Technical submittal. 

C. The Contractor’s Communications Technicians assigned to the System 
shall be fully trained, qualified, and certified by the OEM on the 
engineering, installation, operation, and testing of the System. The 
Contractor shall provide formal written evidence of current OEM 
certification(s) for the installer(s) as a part of the submittal or to 
the RE before being allowed to commence work on the System. 


D. The Contractor shall display all applicable national, state and local 
licenses. 

E. The Contractor shall submit copy (s) of Certificate of successful 
completion of OEM’s installation/training school for installing 
technicians of the System’s Nurse Call and/or Code Blue equipment being 
proposed. 

1.6 CODES AND PERMITS 

A. Provide all necessary permits and schedule all inspections as 
identified in the contract’s milestone chart, so that the system is 
proof of performance tested, certified and approved by VA and ready for 
operation on a date directed by the Owner. 

B. The contractor is responsible to adhere to all codes described herein 
and associated contractual, state and local codes. 

1.7 SCHEDULING 

A. After the award of contract, the Contractor shall prepare a detailed 
schedule (aka milestone chart) using “Microsoft Project” software or 
equivalent. The Contractor Project Schedule (CPS) shall indicate 
detailed activities for the projected life of the project. The CPS 
shall consist of detailed activities and their restraining 
relationships. It will also detail manpower usage throughout the 
project. 

B. It is the responsibility of the Contractor to coordinate all work with 
the other trades for scheduling, rough-in, and finishing all work 
specified. The owner will not be liable for any additional costs due 
to missed dates or poor coordination of the supplying contractor with 
other trades. 

1.8 REVIEW OF CONTRACT DRAWINGS AND EQUIPMENT DATA SUBMITTALS (AKA 
TECHNICAL SUBMITTAL[S]) 

 (Note: The Contractor is encouraged, but not required, to submit 
separate technical submittal(s) outlining alternate technical 
approach(s) to the system requirements stated here-in as long as each 
alternate technical document(s) is complete, separate, and submitted in 
precisely the same manner as outlined herein. VA will review and rate 
each received alternate submittal, which follows this requirement, in 
exactly the same procedure as outlined herein. Partial, add-on, or 
addenda type alternates will not be accepted or reviewed.) 

A. Submit at one time within 10 days of contract awarding, drawings and 
product data on all proposed equipment and system. Check for 


compliance with contract documents and certify compliance with 
Contractor's "APPROVED" stamp and signature. 

B. Support all submittals with descriptive materials, i.e., catalog 
sheets, product data sheets, diagrams, and charts published by the 
manufacturer. These materials shall show conformance to specification 
and drawing requirements. 

C. Where multiple products are listed on a single cut-sheet, circle or 
highlight the one that you propose to use. Provide a complete and 
through equipment list of equipment expected to be installed in the 
system, with spares, as a part of the submittal. Special 
Communications (TVE-005OP3B) will not review any submittal that does 
not have this list. 

D. Provide four (4) copies to the PM for technical review. The PM will 
provide a copy to the offices identified in Paragraph 1.3.C & D, at a 
minimum for compliance review as described herein where each 
responsible individual(s) shall respond to the PM within 10 days of 
receipt of their acceptance or rejection of the submittal(s). 

E. Provide interconnection methods, conduit (where not already installed), 
junction boxes (J-Boxes), cable, interface fixtures and equipment lists 
for the: ENR(s) ( aka DMARC), TER, TCR, MCR, MCOR, PCR, ECR, Stacked 
Telecommunications Rooms (STR), Nurses Stations (NS), Head End Room 
(HER), Head End Cabinet (HEC), Head End Interface Cabinet (HEIC) and 
approved TCO locations TIP interface distribution layout drawing, as 
they are to be installed and interconnected to teach other (REFER TO 
APPENDIX B – SUGGESTED TELECOMMUNI-CAITONS ONE LINE TOPOLOGY pull-out 
drawing). 

F. Equipment technical literature detailing the electrical and technical 
characteristics of each item of equipment to be furnished. 

G. Engineering drawings of the System, showing calculated of expected 
signal levels at the headend input and output, each input and output 
distribution point, and signal level at each telecommunications outlet. 

H. Surveys Required as a Part of The Technical Submittal: 

1. The Contractor shall provide the following System surveys that 
depict various system features and capacities required in addition 
to the on-site survey requirements described herein (see 
Specification Paragraph 2.4.3). Each survey shall be in writing and 
contain the following information (the formats are suggestions and 


may be used for the initial Technical Submittal Survey 
requirements), as a minimum: 

a. Nurse Call Cable System Design Plan: 

1) An OEM and contractor designed functioning Nurse Call System 
cable plan to populate the entire TIP empty conduit/pathway 
distribution systems provided as a part of Specification 27 11 
00 shall be provided as a part of the technical proposal. A 
specific functioning Nurse Call: cable, interfaces, J-boxes 
and back boxes shall coincide with the total growth items as 
described herein. It is the Contractor’s responsibility to 
provide the Systems’ entire Nurse Call cable and accessory 
requirements and engineer a functioning Nurse Call 
distribution system and equipment requirement plan of the 
following paragraph(s), at a minimum: 

2) The required Nurse Call and/or Code Blue Equipment Locations: 

EQUIPPED ITEM 

CAPACITY 

GROWTH 

Master Stations 

 

 

Dome Lights 

 

 

Room 

 

 

Corridor 

 

 

Other 

 

 

Patient Stations 

 

 

Single 

 

 

Dual 

 

 

Isolation 

 

 

Other 

 

 

Emergency Stations 

 

 

Bath 

 

 

Toilet 

 

 

Isolation 

 

 

Other 

 

 

Staff Stations 

 

 

Duty Stations 

 

 

Code Blue 

 

 

Patient Locations 

 

 

Surgical Recovery Locations 

 

 




EQUIPPED ITEM 

CAPACITY 

GROWTH 

Medical Recovery Locations 

 

 

ICU Locations 

 

 

SICU 

 

 

MICU 

 

 

CCU 

 

 

Other 

 

 

Emergency Room Locations 

 

 

Other 

 

 

Supervisory Locations 

 

 

Nurse Stations 

 

 

On-Call Rooms 

 

 

Other 

 

 

Remote Locations 

 

 

Telephone Operator’s Room 

 

 

Police Control Room 

 

 

Other 

 

 

 

 

 



3) The required Nurse Call and/or Code Blue Cable 
Plant/Connections: 

 The Contractor shall clearly and fully indicate this category 
for each item identified herein as a part of the technical 
submittal. For this purpose, the following definitions and 
sample connections are provided to detail the system’s 
capability: 

EQUIPPED ITEM 

CAPACITY 

GROWTH 

Central Control Cabinet/Equipment 

 

 

Location 

 

 

Power Supply(s) 

 

 

UPS(s) 

 

 

Essential Electrical Power Panel(s) 

 

 

Other 

 

 

Cable Plant 

 

 

Supply to Locations Identified in 
Paragraph 1.8.H.1.a.2) 

 

 

Remote Locations 

 

 



 


1.9 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS (AS BUILTS) 

A. Throughout progress of the Work, maintain an accurate record of changes 
in Contract Documents. Upon completion of Work, transfer recorded 
changes to a set of Project Record Documents. 

B. The floorplans shall be marked in pen to include the following: 

1. Each device specific locations with UL labels affixed. 

2. Conduit locations. 

3. Each interface and equipment specific location. 

4. Head-end equipment and specific location. 

5. Wiring diagram. 

6. Labeling and administration documentation. 

7. Warranty certificate. 

8. System test results. 

1.10 WARRANTIES / GUARANTY 

A. The Contractor shall warrant the installation to be free from defect in 
material and workmanship for a period of two (2) years from the date of 
acceptance of the project by the owner. The Contractor shall agree to 
remedy covered defects within four (4) hours of notification of major 
failures or within twenty-four (24) hours of notification for 
individual station related problems. 

B. The Contractor shall agree to grantee the system according to the 
guidelines outlined in Article 4 herein. 

1.11 USE OF THE SITE 

A. Use of the site shall be at the GC’s direction. 

B. Coordinate with the GC for lay-down areas for product storage and 
administration areas. 

C. Coordinate work with the GC and their sub-contractors. 

D. Access to buildings wherein the work is performed shall be directed by 
the GC. 

1.12 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING 

A. Deliver, store, and handle products using means and methods that will 
prevent damage, deterioration, and loss, including theft. 

B. Store products in original containers. 

C. Coordinate with the GC for product storage. There may be little or no 
storage space available on site. Plan to potentially store materials 
off site. 

D. Do not install damaged products. Remove damaged products from the site 
and replaced with new product at no cost to the Owner. 


1.13 PROJECT CLOSE-OUT 

A. Prior to final inspection and acceptance of the work, remove all 
debris, rubbish, waste material, tools, construction equipment, 
machinery and surplus materials from the project site and thoroughly 
clean your work area. 

B. Before the project closeout date, the Contractor shall submit: 

1. OEM Equipment Warranty Certificates. 

2. Evidence of compliance with requirements of governing authorities 
such as the Low Voltage Certificate of Inspection. 

3. Project record documents. 

4. Instruction manuals and software that is a part of the system. 

5. System Guaranty Certificate. 

C. Contractor shall submit written notice that: 

1. Contract Documents have been reviewed. 

2. Project has been inspected for compliance with contract. 

3. Work has been completed in accordance with the contract. 

PART 2 – PRODUCTS / FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

2.0 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS 

A. Furnish and install a complete and fully functional and operable Nurse 
Call System for each location shown on the contract drawings and TCOs 
WHOSE EMPTY CONDUIT SYSTEM WAS PROVIDED AS A PART OF SPECIFICATION 27 
11 00. 

B. Coordinate features and select interface components to form an 
integrated Nurse Call system. Match components and interconnections 
between the systems for optimum performance of specified functions. 

C. Expansion Capability: The Nurse Call equipment interfaces and cables 
shall be able to increase number of enunciation points in the future by 
a minimum of 50 percent (%) above those indicated without adding any 
internal or external components or main trunk cable conductors. 

D. Equipment: Active electronic type shall use solid-state components, 
fully rated for continuous duty unless otherwise indicated. Select 
equipment for normal operation on input power usually supplied between 
110 to 130 VAC, 60 Hz supplied from the Facility’s Emergency Electrical 
Power System. 

E. Meet all FCC requirements regarding equipment listing, low radiation 
and/or interference of RF signal(s). The system shall be designed to 
prevent direct pickup of signals from within and outside the building 
structure. 


G. Weather/Water Proof Equipment: Listed and labeled by an OSHA certified 
NRTL (i.e. UL) for duty outdoors or in damp locations. 

2.1 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 

A. Furnish and install a complete and fully functional and operable Nurse 
Call and/or Code Blue System WHOSE EMPTY CONDUIT SYSTEM WAS PROVIDED AS 
A PART OF SPECIFICATION 27 11 00. 

B. The Contractor is responsible for interfacing the PA, MATV, RED, and 
Patient Bed Service Walls systems with the System. 

C. The Contractor shall continually employ interfacing methods that are 
approved by the OEM and VA. At a minimum, an acceptable interfacing 
method requires not only a physical and mechanical connection, but also 
a matching of signal, voltage, and processing levels with regard to 
signal quality and impedance. The interface point must adhere to all 
standards described herein for the full separation of Critical Care and 
Life Safety systems. 

D. The System Contractor shall connect the System ensuring that all NFPA 
and UL Critical Care and Life Safety Circuit and System separation 
guidelines are satisfied. The System Contractor is not allowed to make 
any connections to the Telephone System. VA shall arrange for the 
interconnection between the PA, MATV, RED, and Patient Bed Service 
Walls Systems with the appropriate responsible parties. 

E. System hardware shall consist of a standalone (separate) nurse call 
patient communications network comprised of nurse consoles, control 
stations, staff and duty stations, room and corridor dome lights, 
pillow speakers/call cords, pull cord and/or emergency push button 
stations, wiring. And, other options such as, pocket page interfaces, 
computer interfaces, printer interfaces, wireless / telephone network 
interfaces, and nurse locating system interface (when specifically 
approved first by TVE 005OP3B) and as shown on drawings. All necessary 
equipment required to meet the intent of these specifications, whether 
or not enumerated within these specifications, shall be supplied and 
installed to provide a complete and operating nurse call patient 
communications network. It is not acceptable to utilize the telephone 
cable system for the control and distribution of nurse call (code Blue) 
signals and equipment. 

F. System firmware shall be the product of a reputable firmware OEM of 
record with a proven history of product reliability and sole control 
over all source code. Manufacturer shall provide, free of charge, 


product firmware/software upgrades for a period of two (2) years from 
date of acceptance by VA for any product feature enhancements. System 
configuration programming changes shall not require any exchange of 
parts and shall be capable of being executed remotely via a modem 
connection (when specifically approved first by TVE 005OP3B). 

G. The Nurse Call Head End Equipment shall be located in the existing 
Telecommunications Room. The Nurse Call / Code Blue System may 
interface the PA system when specifically approved by VA Headquarters T 
VE 005OP3B during the project approval process prior to contract 
bidding. 

H. The System shall utilize microprocessor components for all signaling 
and programming circuits and functions. Self contained or on board 
system program memory shall be non-volatile and protected from erasure 
from power outages for a minimum of 12 hours. 

I. Provide a backup battery or a UPS for the System (including each 
distribution cabinet/point, CRT and Monitor) to allow normal operation 
and function (as if there was no AC power failure) in the event of an 
AC power failure or during input power fluctuations for a minimum of 30 
minutes. 

J. The System is defined as Critical Service and the Code Blue functions 
is defined as Life Safety/Support by NFPA (re Part 1.1.A) and so 
evaluated by JCAHCO. Therefore, the system shall have a minimum of two 
(2) additional remote enunciation points in order to satisfy NFPA’s 
Life Safety Code 101 (the typical secondary locations are Telephone 
Operators Room, MAS ER Desk, Boiler Plant, etc; AND the primary 
location is required to be in the SCC Room. 

1. These two (2) additional remote locations shall be fully manned: 

a. 24/7/365 for certified Hospital Clinics. 

b. As long as other identified VA Medical / Servicing Facilities are 
open for servicing patients. 

d. The minimum remote enunciation locations shall be: 

1) The Telephone / PBX Operator Room. 

2) The Police Control / Operations Room. 

3) Other location(s) that is specifically approved by VA 
Headquarters TVE - 005OP3B DURING THE PROJECT DEVELOPMENT 
STAGES AND PRIOR TO EQUIPMENT PURCHASE. 


2. In addition to the two (2) remote locations afore described, the 
following locations are the minimum required for additional Nurse 
Call /Code Blue Annunciation: 

a. “On Call” Rooms. 

b. Each Nurse Master Station. 

c. Each Staff Station. 

d. Each Duty Station. 

3. The MAXIMUM enunciation time period from placement of the Code Blue 
Call to enunciation at each remote locations is 10 seconds; and, 15 
seconds to the subsequent enunciating media stations (i.e. PA, Radio 
Paging, Emergency Telephone or Radio Backup, etc.). 

K. Each Code Blue System shall be designed to provide continuous 
electrical supervision of the complete and entire system (i.e. dome 
light bulbs [each light will be considered supervised if they use any 
one or a combination of (UL) approved electrical supervision 
alternates, as identified in UL-1069, 1992 revision], wires, contact 
switch connections, circuit boards, data, audio, and communication 
busses, main and UPS power, etc.). All alarm initiating and signaling 
circuits shall be supervised for open circuits, short circuits, and 
system grounds. Main and UPS power circuits shall be supervised for a 
change in state (i.e. primary to backup, low battery, UPS on line, 
etc.). When an open, short or ground occurs in any system circuit, an 
audible and visual fault alarm signal shall be initiated at the nurse 
control station and all remote locations. 

L. When the System is approved to connect to a separate communications 
system (i.e. LAN, WAN, Telephone, Public Address, radio raging, 
wireless systems, etc) the connection point shall meet the following 
minimum requirements for each hard wired / wireless connection (note 
each wireless system connection MUST BE APPROVED PRIOR TO CONTRACT BID 
BY VA HEADQUARTERS TVE - 005OP3B AND SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT - 005OP2B – 
hereinafter referred to as SM - 005OP2B): 

1. UL 60950-1/2. 

2. FIPS 142. 

3. FCC Part 15 Listed Radio Equipment restriction compliance approved 
by SM – 005OP2B. 

M. All passive distribution equipment shall meet or exceed -80 dB 
radiation shielding (aka RFI) shielding specifications and be provided 
with connectors specified by the OEM. 


N. All equipment face plates utilized in the system shall be stainless 
steel, anodized aluminum or UL approved cycolac plastic for the areas 
where provided. 

O. Noise filters and surge protectors shall be provided for each equipment 
interface cabinet, headend cabinet, control console and local and 
remote amplifier locations to insure protection from input primary AC 
power surges and to insure noise glitches are not induced into low 
voltage data circuits. 

P. Plug-in connectors shall be provided to connect all equipment, except 
coaxial cables. Coaxial cable distribution points shall use coaxial 
cable connections recommended by the cable OEM and approved by the 
system OEM. Base band cable systems shall utilize barrier terminal 
screw type connectors, at a minimum. As an alternate, crimp type 
connectors installed with a ratchet type installation tool are 
acceptable provided the cable dress, pairs, shielding, grounding, 
connections and labeling are the same as the barrier terminal strip 
connectors. Tape of any type, wire nuts or solder type connections are 
unacceptable and will not be approved. 

R. Audio Level Processing: The control equipment shall consist of audio 
mixer(s), volume limiter(s) and/or compressor(s), and power 
amplifier(s) to process, adjust, equalize, isolate, filter, and amplify 
each audio channel for each sub-zone in the system and distribute them 
into the System’s RF interfacing distribution trunks and amplification 
circuits. It is acceptable to use identified Telephone System cable 
pairs designated for Two-Way Radio interface and control use or 
identified as spare telephone cable pairs by the Facility’s Telephone 
System Contractor. The use of telephone cable to distribute RF signals, 
carrying system or sub-system AC or DC voltage is not acceptable and 
will not be approved. Additionally, each control location shall be 
provided with the equipment required to insure the system can produce 
its designed audio channel capacity at each speaker identified on the 
contract drawings. The Contractor shall provide: a spare set of 
telephone paging modules as recommended by the OEM (as a minimum 
provide one spare module for each installed module); one spare audio 
power amplifier, one spare audio mixer, one spare audio volume limiter 
and/or compressor, and one spare audio automatic gain adjusting device, 
and minimum RF equipment recommended by the OEM. 


S. Contractor is responsible for pricing all accessories and miscellaneous 
equipment required to form a complete and operating system. Unless 
otherwise noted in this Part, equipment quantities shall be as 
indicated on the drawings. 

R. System Performance: 

1. At a minimum, each distribution, interconnection, interface, 
terminating point and TCO shall be capable of supporting the 
Facility’s Nurse Call and/or Code Blue System voice and data service 
as follows: 

a. Shall be compliant with and not degrade the operating parameters 
of the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) and the Federal 
Telecommunications System (FTS) at each PSTN and FTS interface 
(if attachment is permitted by TVE 005OP3B), interconnection and 
TCO terminating locations detailed on the contract drawings. 

b. The System shall provide the following minimum operational 
functions: 

1) Code Blue calls shall be cancelable at the calling station 
only. The nurse call master station (s) that a managing Code 
Blue functions shall not have the ability to cancel Code Blue 
calls. 

2) Each Code Blue system shall be able to receive audio calls 
from all bedside stations simultaneously. 

3) Calls placed from any Code Blue station shall generate Code 
Blue emergency type audible and visual signals at each 
associated nurse control and duty station, respective dome 
lights and all local and remote annunciator panels. Calls 
placed from a bedside station shall generate emergency type 
visual signals at the bedside station and associated dome 
light(s) in addition to the previous stated stations and 
panels. 

4) Activating the silencing device at any location, while a Code 
Blue call or system fault is occurring shall mute the audible 
signals at the alarm location. 

a) The audible alarm shall regenerate at the end of the 
selected time-out period until the call or fault is 
corrected. 

b) The visual signals shall continue until the call is 
canceled and/or a fault is corrected. When the fault is 


corrected, all signals generated by the fault shall 
automatically cease, returning the System to a standby 
status. 

c) Audible signals shall be regenerated in any local or remote 
annunciator panel that is in the silence mode, in the event 
an additional Code Blue call is placed in any Code Blue 
system. 

d) The additional Code Blue call shall also generate visual 
signals at all annunciators to identify the location of the 
call. 

2. Each System Nurse Call location shall generate a minimum of 
distinct calls: 

a. Routine: single flashing dome lights & master station color and 
audio tone, 

b. Staff Assist: rapid flashing dome lights & master station color 
and audio tone, 

c. Emergency: Red flashing done lights & master station color and 
audio tone, 

d. Code Blue (if equipped): Blue flashing dome lights and master 
station color and audio tone, 

e. Each generated call shall be cancelable at ONLY the originating 
location, 

f. Staff Locator: Green Flashing dome lights & master station color 
and audio tone, and 

2.3 MANUFACTURERS 

A. The products specified shall be new, FCC and UL Listed, labeled and 
produced by OEM manufacturer of record. An OEM of record shall be 
defined as a company whose main occupation is the manufacture for sale 
of the items of equipment supplied and which: 

1. Maintains a stock of replacement parts for the item submitted, 

2. Maintains engineering drawings, specifications, and operating 
manuals for the items submitted, and 

3. Has published and distributed descriptive literature and equipment 
specifications on the items of equipment submitted at least 30 days 
prior to the Invitation for Bid. 

B. Specifications contained herein as set forth in this document detail 
the salient operating and performance characteristics of equipment in 
order for VA to distinguish acceptable items of equipment from 


unacceptable items of equipment. When an item of equipment is offered 
or furnished for which there is a specification contained herein, the 
item of equipment offered or furnished shall meet or exceed the 
specification for that item of equipment. 

C. Equipment Standards and Testing: 

1. The System has been defined herein as connected to systems 
identified as Critical Service performing various Emergency and Life 
Support Functions. Therefore, at a minimum, the system shall conform 
to all aforementioned National and/or Local Life Safety Codes (which 
ever are the more stringent), NFPA, NEC, this specification, JCAHCO 
Life Safety Accreditation requirements, and the OEM recommendations, 
instructions, and guidelines. 

2. All supplies and materials shall be listed, labeled or certified by 
UL or a NRTL where such standards have been established for the 
supplies, materials or equipment. 

3. The provided equipment required by the System design and approved 
technical submittal must conform with each UL standard in effect for 
the equipment, as of the date of the technical submittal (or the 
date when the RE approved system equipment necessary to be replaced) 
was technically reviewed and approved by VA. Where a UL standard is 
in existence for equipment to be used in completion of this 
contract, the equipment must bear the approved UL seal. 

4. Each item of electronic equipment to be provided under this contract 
must bear the approved UL seal or the seal of the testing laboratory 
that warrants the equipment has been tested in accordance with, and 
conforms to the specified standards. The placement of the UL Seal 
shall be a permanent part of the electronic equipment that is not 
capable of being transportable from one equipment item to another. 

2.4 PORDUCTS 

A. General. 

1. Contractor is responsible for pricing all accessories and 
miscellaneous equipment required to form a complete and operating 
system. The equipment quantities provided herein shall be as 
indicated on the drawings with the exception of the indicated spare 
equipment. 

2. Contractor Furnished Equipment List (CFEs): 

a. The Contractor is required to provide a list of the CFE equipment 
to be furnished. The quantity, make and model number of each 


item is required. Select the required equipment items quantities 
that will satisfy the needs of the system as described herein and 
with the OEM’s concurrence applied to the list(s), in writing. 

 

 Item Quantity Unit 

 1. As required Interface Panel(s) 

 1.a As required Electrical Supervision 

 Trouble Enunciator 

 1.a.1 As required Equipment Back Box(s) 

 1.b As required Telephone 

 1.c As required Public Address 

 1.d As required Radio Paging / Equipment 

 1.e As required Wireless / Equipment 

 1.f. As required Radio Pager / Equipment 

 1.g As required Wireless / Equipment 

 1.f As required Personal Communicator / 
Equipment 

 2. As required Lightning Arrestor 

 3. As required Head End Equipment/Locations 

 3.a As required Cabinet(s) 

 3.a.1 As required AC Power Conditioner & Filter 

 3.a.2 As required AC Power Strip 

 3.a.3 As required UPS 

 3.a.4 As required Interconnecting Wire/Cables 

 3.a.5 As required Wire / Cable Connector(s) 

 3.a.6 As required Wire / Cable Terminator(s) 

 3.b As required Wire Management System 

 3.b As required Head End Function(s) 

 3.b.1 As required H7 Interface 

 3.b.2 As required Nurse Locator 

 3.b.3 As required Staff Locator 

 4. As required Master Station(s) 

 4.a As required Nurse Locator 

 4.b As required Staff Locator 

 5. As required Distribution System(s) 

 5.a As required Staff Station 

 5.a.1 As required Equipment Back Box(s) 

 5.b As required Duty Station 

 5.b.1 As required Equipment Back Box(s) 

 5.c As required Code Blue Station 

 5.c.1 As required Equipment Back Box(s) 

 5.c.2 2 (MIN) Remote Station(s) 

 5.d As required Patient Station(s) 

 5.d.1 As required Equipment Back Box(s) 

 5.d.2 As required Bed Interface(s) 

 5.d.3 As required Pillow Speaker 

 5.d.4 As required Push Button Cordset 

 5.d.5 As required Dummy Plugs 

 5.d.6 As required Bed Integrated Control 

 5.d.7 As required Lighting Interface Module 

 5.d.8 As required TV Control Interface 

 5.d.9 As required TV Control Jack 

 5.d.10 As required TV Interconnection Cables 

 5.d.11 As required HDTV Coaxial 


 

 5.d.12 As required HDTV/Nurses Call Interface/ 

 Control 

 5.d.13 As required Auxiliary Mounting Interface 

 5.e As required Emergency Station(s) 

 5.e.1 As required Equipment Back Box(s) 

 5.e.2 As required Toilet Emergency Station 

 (waterproof) 

 5.e.3 As required Shower Emergency Station 

 (waterproof) 

 5.e.4 As required Lavatory Emergency Station 

 (waterproof) 

 5.f. As required Room Dome Light 

 5.f.1 As required Equipment Back Box(s) 

 5.g As required Other Dome Light(s) 

 5.g.1 As required Equipment Back Box(s) 

 5.g.2 As required Corridor Dome Light 

 5.g.3 As required Intersectional Dome Light 

 5.h As required System Cable(s) 

 5.h.1 As required Coaxial 

 5.h.2 As required System Pin 

 5.h.3 As required Audio 

 5.h.4 As required Control 

 5.h.5 As required Video 

 5.i As required System Connector(s) 

 5.i.1 As required Coaxial 

 5.i.2 As required System Pin 

 5.i.2 As required Audio 

 5.i.3 As required Control 

 5.i.4 As required Video 

 5.j As required Wire Management Required as 
described herein 

 

B. NS Room(s): 

 Refer to CFM Physical Security Manual (07-2007) for VA Facilities, 
Chapters 9.3 & 1) and PG 18-10, EDM, Chapters 7- Table 7-1, 8 & 
Appendix B, Telecommunications One Line Topology for specific Room and 
TIP Connection Requirements. 

 

C. TER, SCC, PCR, STR, HER Rooms and Equipment: 

 Refer to CFM Physical Security Manual (07-2007) for VA Facilities, 
Chapters 9.3 & 1) and PG 18-10, EDM, Chapters 7- Table 7-1, 8 & 
Appendix B, Telecommunications One Line Topology for specific Room and 
TIP Connection Requirements. 

D. Telecommunications Room(s) (TR): 

1. Locate the Nurse Call and/or Code Blue floor distribution equipment 
as required by system design and OEM direction. Provide secured and 
lockable cabinet/rack(s) as required. 

2. Head-End Equipment: 


a. Provide all required power supplies, communications hubs, network 
switches, intelligent controllers and other devices necessary to 
form a complete system. Head-end components may be rack mounted 
or wall mounted in an enclosed metal enclosure. 

b. Provide the head end equipment in the closest Telecommunications 
Room where the System is installed. 

c. Provide the System UPS inside the cabinet or in a separate 
cabinet adjacent to the head end cabinet that shall maintain a 
minimum of 30 minute battery back-up to all system components. 

d. Equipment Cabinet: Comply with TIA/EIA-310-D. Lockable, 
ventilated metal cabinet houses terminal strips, power supplies, 
amplifiers, system volume control, and other switching and 
control devices required for conversation channels and control 
functions. See Paragraph 2.5.E for the Cabinet’s minimum 
internal items that are in addition to the installed System 
equipment. 

e. Vertical Equipment Rack, Wall Mounted (to be included inside of 
the Equipment Cabinet) containing the following minimum items: 

1) 36” (28RU) internal rack space, welded steel construction, 
minimum 20” usable depth, adjustable front mounting rails. 

2) Install the following products in rack provided by same 
manufacturer or as specified: 

a) Security screws w/ nylon isolation bushings. 

b) Textured blank panels. 

c) Custom mounts for components without rack mount kits. 

d) Security covers. 

e) Internal system ground copper buss (may be substituted with 
a bare #0 AWG copper wire or equivalent size copper mesh 
strip connected to ONLY THE FACILITY’S SIGNAL GROUNDING 
SYSTEM. 

f) Power Sequencer- rack-mounted power conditioner and 
(provide as-needed) delayed sequencer(s) with (2) 
unswitched outlets each and contact closure control inputs. 
Connect the conditioner to one of the dual duplex outlets. 

g) Two (2) each 120VAC @ 20A dual duplex outlets, connected 
via conduit to the nearest Electrical Service Panel that is 
supplied by the Facility’s Essential Electrical System. 


h) One (1) each 120VAC @ 15A Power Distribution Strip(s). 
Connect each strip to the unstitched outlet on the power 
conditioner. 

3. HL7 Interface: 

a. The system may support downloading and updating of patient data 
from the hospital admission system (or other database) via the 
HL7 standard. The data only has to travel one way, i.e. from the 
admission system to the nurse-call system. 

b. Coordinate with the Owner the exact fields that will be populated 
from the admissions system in the nurse-call system. 

c. The Facility’s LAN/WAN is not allowed for Nurses Call/Code Blue 
main wiring / function that must be a “stand alone primary cable 
infrastructure” as described herein. 

d. Connections to the VA LAN/WAN for functional or operable 
conditions will be allowed ONLY when the LAN/WAN system has been 
demonstrated and NFPA (at a minimum by TVE-005OP3B) Certified 
meeting Life Safety Standards. 

e. Provide one (1) spare HL Interface unit. 

 

F. TIP Cable Systems: 

 Connect the system to the TIP system provided as a part of Speciation 
Section 27 15 00. Provide additional TIP equipment, interfaces and 
connections as required by System design. Provide secured pathway(s) 
and lockable cabinet/rack(s) as required. 

G. Interface Equipment: 

1. TCR: 

a. Code Blue Annunciation Station: 

1) The Code Blue Remote Annunciation Station shall be located in 
the Telephone Operators Room, Police Control Center. 

2) The Annunciation Station shall be connected to the System via 
hard wire connection(s) that shall contain all the electrical 
supervisory tone signals, visual bulbs, read out panel to 
indicate the location of the Code and system troubles. 

3) The System shall not be connected to the Telephone system 
unless specifically APPROVED BY VA HEADQUARTERS (005OP3B) and 
(005OP2B) PRIOR TO CONTRACT BID. 


4) The Annunciation Station shall be installed in a location 
directly viewable and the readout is completely readable from 
the Public Address Microphone Control Console. 

5) Provide one (1) spare panel. 

b. Electrical Supervision Trouble Annunciator Panel: 

1) The Electrical Supervision Trouble Annunciation Panel shall be 
located in the Telephone Operators Room, Police Control 
Center, associate Nurses Station(s). 

2) The panel(s) shall be compatible with the generated electrical 
and/or electronic supervising signals to continuously monitor 
the operating condition for the System head-end processing 
equipment, master stations, staff stations, patient stations, 
duty stations, audio power amplifier(s), UPS, power supplies, 
dome lights and interconnecting trunks. The panels shall 
generate an audible and visual signal when the System’s 
supervising system detects a system and equipment trouble or 
trunk-line is malfunctioning. 

3) Provide one (1) spare panel. 

2. Hospital Bed Interface (s): 

a. Provide a multi-pin receptacle for bed connection. 

b. Connect cable from the multi-pin receptacle to the nurse-call 
system, so that alarms, such as bed exit, shall be monitored by 
the nurse-call system. 

c. Connect cable from the multi-pin receptacle to the nurse-call 
system, so that the bedside control buttons, such as nurse call, 
and television controls are functional and monitored. 

d. The hospital uses the following beds: 

1) Hill Rohm 

2) Stryker 

3) Other 

e. Provide one (1) spare interface for each ten (10) interfaces 
installed. 

3. Nurse (aka Staff) Locator Interface: 

a. The System must be capable of performing nurse-locator functions. 

b. The System must be capable of performing staff-locator functions 

c. These functions may be combined into one operation. 

d. Provide two (2) spare interfaces. 

4. Lighting Interface Module: 


a. Provide an interface module for the pillow speakers to control up 
to 2 lights. Coordinate with the electrical contractor the exact 
voltage requirements. 

b. Provide one (1) spare module for each ten (10) modules installed. 

5. Pillow Speaker Interfaces: 

a. See functional requirements herein. 

b. Provide (1) pillow speaker for each patient station. 

c. Provide one (1) spare pillow speaker for each twenty (20) 
speakers installed. 

6. TV Remote Control Interface: 

a. The pillow speaker shall have the following TV control 
capability: 

1) Play the TV audio through the pillow speaker. 

2) Change channels up and down. 

3) Increase and decrease the volume. 

4) TV audio mute. 

5) UL Certified for direct patient contact. 

b. Provide one (1) spare interface for each 20 interfaces installed. 

7. TV Control Jack and Wiring: 

a. Provide connection from the pillow speaker to the TV location. 
Terminate wire on a jack in the TV low voltage faceplate. 
Coordinate faceplate opening with the cabling contractor. 
Coordinate jack type with the TV (typically it is a ¼” jack, but 
verify prior to installation). 

b. Provide patch cord from the TV control jack to the TV. 

c. Provide one (1) spare complete assembly for each twenty (20) 
assemblies installed. 

9. TER 

a. Paging adaptor (When connections are specifically approved by TVE 
005OP3B): 

1) The Contractor shall coordinate the installation of the paging 
adapter(s) designed for use with the Facility’s telephone 
system with the Facility Telephone Contractor or local 
telephone company. 

2) The Contractor shall provide and install a paging adapter(s) 
for each zone and sub zone. The paging adapter(s) shall be 
accessible by dialing a telephone number provided by the 
Facility’s Telephone Contractor. The Paging Adapter shall: 


a) Monitor each audio input and output on the unit. 

b) Be provided with an electrical supervision panel to provide 
both audio and visual trouble alarms. 

c) Be provided as part of the headend equipment and shall be 
located in the Telephone Switch Room. 

d) Be provide with Executive Paging Override of all routine 
paging calls in progress or being accessed to allow system 
“all call” (aka global) and radio paging calls designated 
as Code One Blue) functions. 

e) Be capable of internal time out capability. 

f) Function completely with the interface module. 

g) Provide one spare adapter. 

3) Time Out Device: 

 A time out device/capability shall be provided to prevent 
system “hang-up” due to an off-hook telephone. The device 
shall be able to be preset from 30 seconds to two (2) minutes. 
Its function shall not interfere with or override the required 
“all call” (aka global) operational capability. 

H. Call Initiation, Annunciation and Response: 

1. Light and Tones: 

a Calls may be initiated through: 

1) Patient station. 

2) Staff station. 

3) Code Blue station. 

4) Toilet Emergency Station pull cord / push button. 

5) Shower Emergency Station pull cord. 

6) Bed Pillow speaker. 

7) Bed Push-button cordset. 

8) Hospital Bed Integrated controls. 

b Once a call is initiated, it must be annunciated at the following 
locations: 

1) The Corridor, Intersectional and Room dome light associated 
with the initiating device. 

2) A local master control station indicating the call location 
and priority. 

3) Each duty station. 

4) Each staff station. 

5) Each remote location. 


c) All calls must be displayed until they are cleared by the 
nursing staff ONLY from the initiating device location. 

2. Voice: 

a Calls may be initiated through: 

1) Patient station. 

2) Staff station. 

3) Code Blue station. 

4) Toilet Emergency pull cord / push button station. 

5) Shower Emergency pull cord station. 

6) Pillow speaker. 

7) Push-button cordset. 

8) Integrated bed controls. 

9) Master Station. 

b. Once a call is initiated, it must be annunciated at the following 
locations: 

1) The Corridor, Intersectional and Room dome light associated 
with the initiating device. 

2) A master station indicating the call location and priority. 

3) Any duty stations associated with the unit. 

4) Any staff Stations associated with the unit. 

5) Each remote location. 

c. All calls must be displayed until they are cleared by the nursing 
staff ONLY from the initiating device location. 

3. Provide two-way voice communication between a master station and 
patient, staff, duty and each of the two (2) remote stations. 

4. Failure of voice intercom portion of system shall not interfere with 
visual and audible signal systems. 

5. All calls must be displayed on the master station until they are 
cleared by the nursing staff at ONLY the originating station. If 
multiple calls are received at the master station within a short 
period of time, they shall be stacked based on priority and wait 
time. If there are more calls than the master station screen can 
display at one time (four [4] minimum), the system must provide a 
simple scrolling feature. The nurse must be able to answer any call 
in any order at the master station. The nurse must also be able to 
forward calls to staff members. If a call is not answered within a 
programmable time period, then the system must forward the call to 


appropriate back-up staff identified by each shift supervisor in a 
manner technically approved by VA Headquarters 005OP3B. 

I. Auxiliary Alarm Monitoring: 

1. Each patient station must have the ability to connect a separate and 
isolated auxiliary alarm to it such as an infusion pump or data 
tracking / recording device (patient life support units ARE NOT 
allowed to be connected to these units UNLESS APPROVED BY TVE - 
005OP3B DURING THE PROJECT DEVELOPMENT PHASE AS DESCRIBED HEREIN. 
The System must support naming the device that is being monitored as 
well as display its alarms at the master station and via the room / 
corridor dome light(s). 

2. Provide (2) alarm jacks at each patient station. 

3. The above requirements may ONLY be allowed when the system has been 
approved by VA Headquarters TVE - 005OP3B and TVE - 005OP2B and 
concurred by the appropriate Medical Service(s) indicates it meets 
the minimum guidelines and requirements of Paragraph 2.8.A. 

J. Patient and Staff Assignment: 

1. System may provide for transfer of one or more individual or groups 
of stations from one master station to another without mechanical 
switches or additional wiring of the stations. The transfer may be 
initiated manually be the nurse or automatically at certain times of 
the day. 

2. The Facility’s LAN/WAN IS NOT ALLOWED for Nurses Call/Code Blue main 
wiring which must be a “stand alone primary cable infrastructure.” 
Connections to the VA LAN/WAN will be allowed ONLY when the LAN/WAN 
system has been demonstrated and certified by TVE - 005OP3B meeting 
the minimum guidelines and requirements of the Life Safety Code. 

K. Reports: 

1. The system’s generated reports logging all calls, alarms, response 
time, bed, and staff assignments may be allowed to transmit these 
reports to a central archiving entity. 

2. Reports function shall be limited by passwords and security tier 
level access, so that only supervisors may access it when desired. 

3. Provide instructions to the owner on how to enable/disable the 
reporting functions. 

4. The Facility’s LAN/WAN IS NOT ALLOWED for Nurses Call/Code Blue main 
wiring that must be a “stand alone primary cable infrastructure.” 
Connections to the VA LAN/WAN will be allowed ONLY when the system 


has been demonstrated and certified by 005OP2B meeting the minimum 
guidelines and requirements of the Life Safety Code. 

L. System/Management Software: 

1. Provide and install system/management software on minimum of three 
(3) owner-provided computers. 

a. The management software shall at a minimum provide all 
historical reporting features of the system as well as real-time 
monitoring of events. 

b. The system software shall at a minimum provide the system’s 
operating and functioning parameters and script. The OEM shall 
provide VA with access to the software’s script writing and 
functions. 

2. Provide two (2) spare CD’s with the software installed and operable. 

3. Rights in Data: VA shall have the right to all script and 
programming language of system management software. If commercial 
off the shelf (COTS) or a memorandum of understanding (MOU) is 
required for follow-on maintenance, the Contractor is required to 
accomplish the COTS Survey document and the RE is required to 
accomplish the COTS Acquisition document supplied in Part 5 
Attachments herein. 

 

M. System Functional Station: 

1. Master Control: 

a. Simple Tone and Light: 

1) The visual / aural (tone only) system shall also include a 
power supply and a visual / aural (tone only) display panel in 
the respective OPC receptionist / secretary's office and the 
Day Hospital area and as shown on the drawings. The visual / 
tone display panel shall generate audible and visual emergency 
signals to indicate the location of a placed call. 

2) The Visual Display Panel shall be a digital readout touch 
screen to visually announce the location of incoming calls 
placed in the System including room and bed number and 
priority of the call. Identify each calling station with an 
individual display, including separate displays for each 
patient sharing a dual bedside station. If a digital readout 
touch screen standard is not required or approved by the 
Facility during the project design phase, an alpha - numeric 


scheme shall be provided that identifies the: ward, room and 
bed (i.e. Ward 2a, Room 201, Bed A (or 1) shall read 2A201A - 
or- 2A201-1. Equivalent readouts are acceptable as long as TVE 
005OP3B and the Facility approve the readout). 

a) Calls placed at emergency stations located in toilets and 
baths inside bedrooms shall be displayed for the bed 
closest to the nurse control station. Beds in multi-bed 
bedrooms shall be identified in a clock-wise pattern upon 
entering the bedroom. 

b) It shall display a minimum of four incoming calls. 
Additional placed calls shall be stored in order of 
placement and priority. 

3) The visual / aural (tone only) system shall be installed 
according to the same Procedures, guidelines and standards 
outlined for a regular Nurse Call System for emergency NOT 
CODE BLUE OPERATION. 

4) Speakerphone and handset communication. 

5) Provide one (1) spare station for each ten (1) stations 
installed. 

b. Touch Screen: 

1) Provide a touch screen master station with 15” minimum monitor 
size. 

2) The master station shall have a full control capability over 
staff assignment to patients and beds as well as pagers and 
wireless personal communication devices (when specifically 
approved by 005OP3B on a case by case basis). 

3) Speakerphone and handset communication. 

4) Provide one (1) spare station for each ten (1) stations 
installed. 

2. Staff: 

a. Light and Tine Only. 

b. Voice Communications Enabled. 

c. Provide one (1) spare station for each twenty (20) stations 
installed. 

3. Duty: 

a. Light and Tine Only. 

b. Voice Communications Enabled. 


c. Provide one (1) spare station for each twenty (20) stations 
installed. 

4. Patient: 

a. Single & Dual: 

1) Provide each patient station with the following minimum 

 Feature. 

a) Call button. 

b) Call answered button. 

c) Pillow speaker jack. 

d) Auxiliary alarm monitoring jack. 

e) Hospital bed interface jack (when specially approved by TVE 
- 005OP3B). 

f) Provide one (1) spare station for each twenty (20) stations 
installed. 

N. Distribution System: Refer to Specification Sections 27 11 00, 
Structured TIP Communications Cables; 27 11 00, TIP Communications 
Interface and Equipment Rooms Fittings and 27 15 00, HORIZONTAL and 
Vertical TIP Communications Cabling for additional specific TIP wire 
and cable standards and installation requirements used to install the 
Facility’s TIP network. 

1. In addition to the TIP provided under the aforementioned 
Specification Sections, the contractor shall provide the following 
additional TIP installation and testing requirements, provide the 
following minimum additional System TIP requirements, cables & 
interconnections: 

a. Each wire and cable used in the System shall be specifically OEM 
certified by tags on each reel and recommended and approved for 
installation in the Facility. 

b. The Contractor shall provide the RE a 610 mm (2 foot) sample of 
each wire and/or cable actually employed in the System and each 
certification tag for approval before continuing with the 
installation as described herein. 

c. Fiberoptic Cables: Refer to Specification Section 27 15 00, 
Horizontal and Vertical TIP Communications Cabling; Paragraph 
2.4.C12.d. Fiberoptic Cables – for minimum technical standards 
and requirements for additional System cables. 

d. Copper Cables: Refer to Specification Section 27 15 00, 
Horizontal and Vertical TIP Communications Cabling; Paragraph 


2.4.C12.c. Copper Cables – for minimum technical standards and 
requirements for additional System voice and data cables. 

e. Line Level Audio and Microphone Cable: 

1) Line level audio and microphone cable for inside racks and 
conduit. 

2) Shielded, twisted pair Minimum 22AWG, stranded conductors and 
24AWG drain wire with overall jacket. 

f. Speaker Level Audio (70.7Volt RMS): 

1) For use with 70.7V speaker circuits. 

2) 18AWG stranded pair, minimum. 

g. All cabling shall be plenum or riser (UL-1666) rated. 

h. Provide one (1) spare 1,000 foot roll of approved System (not 
microphone) cable only. 

2. Raceways, Back Boxes and conduit: 

a. In addition to the Raceways, Equipment Room Fittings provided 
under Specification Sections 27 15 00 TIP Communication Room 
Fittings and 27 15 00 – TIP Communications Horizontal and 
Vertical Cabling, provide the following additional TIP raceway 
and fittings: 

b. Each raceway that is open top, shall be: UL certified for 
telecommunications systems, partitioned with metal partitions in 
order to comply with NEC Parts 517 & 800 to “mechanically 
separate telecommunications systems of different service, protect 
the installed cables from falling out when vertically mounted and 
allow junction boxes to be attached to the side to interface 
“drop” type conduit cable feeds. 

c. Intercommunication System cable infrastructure: EMT or in J-hooks 
above accessible ceilings, 24 inches on center. 

d. Junction boxes shall be not less than 2-1/2 inches deep and 6 
inches wide by 6 inches long. 

e. Flexible metal conduit is prohibited unless specifically approved 
by 005OP3B. 

f. System Conduit: 

1) The PA system is NFPA listed as Emergency / Public Safety 
Communication System which requires the entire system to be 
installed in a separate conduit system. 


2) The use of centralized mechanically partitioned wireways may 
be used to augment main distribution conduit on a case by case 
basis when specifically approved by VA Headquarters (005OP3B). 

3) Conduit Sleeves: 

a) The AE has made a good effort to identify where conduit 
sleeves through full-height and fire rated walls on the 
drawings, and has instructed the electrician to provide the 
sleeves as shown on the drawings. 

b) While the sleeves shown on the drawings will be provided by 
others, the contractor is responsible for installing 
conduit sleeves and fire-proofing where necessary. It is 
often the case, that due to field conditions, the nursecall 
cable may have to be installed through an alternate 
route. Any conduit sleeves required due to field 
conditions or those omitted by the engineer shall be 
provided by the cabling contractor. 

g. Device Back Boxes: 

1) Furnish to the electrical contractor all back boxes required 
for the PA system devices. 

2) The electrical contractor shall install the back boxes as well 
as the system conduit. Coordinate the delivery of the back 
boxes with the construction schedule. 

3. UPS: 

a. Provide a backup battery or a UPS for the System to allow normal 
operation and function (as if there was no AC power failure) in 
the event of an AC power failure or during input power 
fluctuations for a minimum of 30 minutes. 

b. As an alternate solution, the telephone system UPS may be 
utilized to meet this requirement at the headend location, as 
long as this function is specifically approved by the Telephone 
Contractor and the RE. 

c. The Nurse Call Contractor shall not make any attachments or 
connection to the telephone system until specifically directed to 
do so, in writing, by the RE. 

d. Provide UPS for all active system components including but not 
limited to: 

1) System Amplifiers. 

2) Microphone Consoles. 


3) Telephone Interface Units. 

4) TER, TR & Headend Equipment Rack(s). 

O. Patient Bedside Prefabricated Units (PBPU): 

1. Where PBPU’s exist in the Facility; the Contractor shall identify 
the “gang box” location on the PBPU designated for installation of 
the telephone jack. This location shall here-in-after be identified 
as the unit’s TCO. The Contractor shall be responsible for obtaining 
written approval and specific instructions from the PBPU OEM 
regarding the necessary disassembly and reassembly of each PBPU to 
the extent necessary to pull wire from above the TIP ceiling 
junction box to the PBPU’s reserved gang box for the unit’s TCO. A 
Contractor provided stainless steel cover plate approved for use by 
the PBPU OEM and Facility IRM Chief shall finish out the jack 
installation. 

2. Under no circumstances shall the Contractor proceed with the PBPU 
installations without the written approval of the PBPU OEM and the 
specific instructions regarding the attachment to or modifying of 
the PBPU. The RE shall be available to assist the Contractor in 
obtaining approvals and instructions in a timely manner as related 
to the project’s time constraints. 

3. It is the responsibility of the Contractor to maintain the UL 
integrity of each PBPU. If the Contractor violates that integrity, 
it shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to obtain on site 
UL re-certification of the violated PBPU at the direction of the RE 
and at the Contractor’s expense. 

P. Installation Kit: 

1. General: The kit shall be provided that, at a minimum, includes all 
connectors and terminals, labeling systems, audio spade lugs, 
barrier strips, punch blocks or wire wrap terminals, heat shrink 
tubing, cable ties, solder, hangers, clamps, bolts, conduit, cable 
duct, and/or cable tray, etc., required to accomplish a neat and 
secure installation. All wires shall terminate in a spade lug and 
barrier strip, wire wrap terminal or punch block. Unfinished or 
unlabeled wire connections shall not be allowed. Turn over to the RE 
all unused and partially opened installation kit boxes, coaxial, 
fiberoptic, and twisted pair cable reels, conduit, cable tray, 
and/or cable duct bundles, wire rolls, physical installation 


hardware. The following are the minimum required installation subkits: 


2. System Grounding: 

a. The grounding kit shall include all cable and installation 
hardware required. All radio equipment shall be connected to 
earth ground via internal building wiring, according to the NEC. 

b. This includes, but is not limited to: 

1) Fiberoptic Optic Cable Armor/External Braid 

2) Coaxial Cable Shields. 

3) Control Cable Shields. 

4) Data Cable Shields. 

5) Equipment Racks. 

6) Equipment Cabinets. 

7) Conduits. 

8) Cable Duct. 

9) Cable Trays. 

10) Interduct 

11) Power Panels. 

12) Connector Panels. 

15) Grounding Blocks. 

3. Fiberoptic Cable: The fiberoptic cable kit shall include all 
fiberoptic connectors, cable tying straps, interduct, heat shrink 
tubing, hangers, clamps, etc. required to accomplish a neat and 
secure installation. 

4. Coaxial Cable: The coaxial cable kit shall include all coaxial 
connectors, cable tying straps, heat shrink tubing, hangers, clamps, 
etc., required to accomplish a neat and secure installation. 

5. Wire and Cable: The wire and cable kit shall include all connectors 
and terminals, audio spade lugs, barrier straps, punch blocks, wire 
wrap strips, heat shrink tubing, tie wraps, solder, hangers, clamps, 
labels etc., required to accomplish a neat and orderly installation. 

6. Conduit, Cable Duct, and Cable Tray: The kit shall include all 
conduit, duct, trays, junction boxes, back boxes, cover plates, feed 
through nipples, hangers, clamps, other hardware required to 
accomplish a neat and secure conduit, cable duct, and/or cable tray 
installation in accordance with the NEC and this document. 

7. Equipment Interface: The equipment kit shall include any item or 
quantity of equipment, cable, mounting hardware and materials needed 


to interface the systems with the identified sub-system(s) according 
to the OEM requirements and this document. 

8. Labels: The labeling kit shall include any item or quantity of 
labels, tools, stencils, and materials needed to completely and 
correctly label each subsystem according to the OEM requirements, 
as-installed drawings, and this document. 

9. Documentation: The documentation kit shall include any item or 
quantity of items, computer discs, as installed drawings, equipment, 
maintenance, and operation manuals, and OEM materials needed to 
completely and correctly provide the system documentation as 
required by this document and explained herein. 

3. NURSE CONTROL (aka MASTER) STATION – provide a station as described 
herein. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 PROJECT MANAGEMENT 

A. Assign a single project manager to this project who will serve as the 
point of contact for the Owner, the General Contractor, and the 
Engineer. 

B. The Contractor shall be proactive in scheduling work at the hospital, 
specifically the Contractor will initiate and maintain discussion with 
the general contractor regarding the schedule for ceiling cover up and 
install cables to meet that schedule. 

C. Contact the Office of Telecommunications, Special Communications Team 
(005OP2B) at (301) 734-0350 to have a VA Certified Telecommunications 
COTR assigned to the project for telecommunications review, equipment 
and system approval and co-ordination with VA’s Spectrum Management and 
OCIS Teams. 

3.2 COORDINATION WITH OTHER TRADES 

A. Coordinate with the cabling contractor the location of the TV faceplate 
and the faceplate opening for the nurse call TV control jack. 

B. Coordinate with the cabling contractor the location of TIP equipment in 
the TER, TCR, PCR, SCC, ECR, STRs, NSs, and TCOs in order to connect to 
the TIP cable network that was installed as a part of Section 
Specification 27 11 00. Contact the RE immediately, in writing, if 
additional location(s) are discovered to be activated that was not 
previously provided. 

C. Before beginning work, verify the location, quantity, size and access 
for the following: 

1. Isolated ground AC power circuits provided for systems. 


2. Primary, emergency and extra auxiliary AC power generator 
requirements. 

3. Junction boxes, wall boxes, wire troughs, conduit stubs and other 
related infrastructure for the systems. 

4. System components installed by others. 

5. Overhead supports and rigging hardware installed by others. 

D. Immediately notify the Owner, GC and Consultant(s) in writing of any 
discrepancies. 

3.3 NEEDS ASSESSMENT 

 Provide a one-on-one meeting with the particular nursing manager of 
each unit affected by the installation of the new nurse call/code blue 
system. Review the floor plan drawing, educate the nursing manager 
with the functions of the equipment that is being provided and gather 
details specific to the individual units; coverage and priorities of 
calls; staffing patterns; and other pertinent details that will affect 
system programming and training. 

3.4 INSTALLATION 

A. General: 

1. Execute work in accordance with National, State and local codes, 
regulations and ordinances. 

2. Install work neatly, plumb and square and in a manner consistent 
with standard industry practice. Carefully protect work from dust, 
paint and moisture as dictated by site conditions. The Contractor 
will be fully responsible for protection of his work during the 
construction phase up until final acceptance by the Owner. 

3. Install equipment according to OEM’s recommendations. Provide any 
hardware, adaptors, brackets, rack mount kits or other accessories 
recommended by OEM for correct assembly and installation. 

4. Secure equipment firmly in place, including receptacles, speakers, 
equipment racks, system cables, etc. 

a. All supports, mounts, fasteners, attachments and attachment 
points shall support their loads with a safety factor of at least 
5:1. 

b. Do not impose the weight of equipment or fixtures on supports 
provided for other trades or systems. 

c. Any suspended equipment or associated hardware must be certified 
by the OEM for overhead suspension. 


d. The Contractor is responsible for means and methods in the 
design, fabrication, installation and certification of any 
supports, mounts, fasteners and attachments. 

5. Finishes for any exposed work such as plates, racks, panels, 
speakers, etc. shall be approved by the Architect, Owner and TVE 
005OP3B. 

6. Coordinate cover plates with field conditions. Size and install 
cover plates as necessary to hide joints between back boxes and 
surrounding wall. Where cover plates are not fitted with 
connectors, provide grommeted holes in size and quantity required. 
Do not allow cable to leave or enter boxes without cover plates 
installed. 

7. Active electronic component equipment shall consist of solid state 
components, be rated for continuous duty service, comply with the 
requirements of FCC standards for telephone and data equipment, 
systems, and service. 

8. Color code all distribution wiring to conform to the Nurse Call 
Industry Standard, EIA/TIA, and this document, whichever is the more 
stringent. At a minimum, all equipment, cable duct and/or conduit, 
enclosures, wiring, terminals, and cables shall be clearly and 
permanently labeled according to and using the provided record 
drawings, to facilitate installation and maintenance. 

9. Connect the System’s primary input AC power to the Facility’ 
Critical Branch of the Emergency AC power distribution system as 
shown on the plans or if not shown on the plans consult with RE 
regarding a suitable circuit location prior to bidding. 

10. Product Delivery, Storage and Handling: 

a. Delivery: Deliver materials to the job site in OEM's original 
unopened containers, clearly labeled with the OEM's name and 
equipment catalog numbers, model and serial identification 
numbers. The RE may inventory the cable, patch panels, and 
related equipment. 

b. Storage and Handling: Store and protect equipment in a manner, 
which will preclude damage as directed by the RE. 

11. Where TCOs are installed adjacent to each other, install one 
outlet for each instrument. 


12. Equipment installed outdoors shall be weatherproof or installed 
in weatherproof enclosures with hinged doors and locks with two 
keys. 

B. Equipment Racks/Cabinets: 

1. Fill unused equipment mounting spaces with blank panels or vent 
panels. Match color to equipment racks/cabinets. 

2. Provide security covers for all devices not requiring routine 
operator control. 

3. Provide vent panels and cooling fans as required for the operation 
of equipment within the OEM' specified temperature limits. Provide 
adequate ventilation space between equipment for cooling. Follow 
manufacturer’s recommendations regarding ventilation space between 
amplifiers. 

4. Provide insulated connections of the electrical raceway to equipment 
racks. 

5. Provide continuous raceway/conduit with no more than 40% fill 
between wire troughs and equipment racks/cabinets for all nonplenum-
rated cable. Ensure each system is mechanically separated 
from each other in the wireway. 

6. Ensure a minimum of 36 inches around each cabinet and/or rack to 
comply with OSHA Safety Standards. Cabinets and/or Racks installed 
side by side – the 36” rule applies to around the entire assembly 

C. Distribution Frames. 

1. A new stand-alone (i.e., self supporting, free standing) PA 
rack/frame may be provided in each TR to interconnect the TCR, PCR, 
SCC, NS, STRs & ECRs. Rack/frames shall be wired in accordance with 
industry standards and shall employ "latest state-of-the-art" 
modular cross-connect devices. The PA riser cable shall be sized to 
satisfy all voice/digital requirements plus not less than 50% spare 
(growth) capacity in each TR which includes a fiber optic backbone. 

2. The frames/racks shall be connected to the TER/MCR system ground. 

D. Wiring Practice - in addition to the MANDATORY infrastructure 
requirements outlined in VA Construction Specifications 27 10 00 – TIP 
Structured Communications Cabling, 27 11 00 – TIP Communications Rooms 
Fittings and 27 15 00 – TIP Horizontal and Vertical Communicators 
Cabling, the following additional practices shall be adhered too: 

1. Comply with requirements for raceways and boxes specified in 
Division 26 Section "Raceway and Boxes for Electrical Systems." 


2. Execute all wiring in strict adherence to the National Electrical 
Code, applicable local building codes and standard industry 
practices. 

3. Wiring shall be classified according to the following low voltage 
signal types: 

a. Balanced microphone level audio (below -20dBm) or Balanced line 
level audio (-20dBm to +30dBm) 

b. 70V audio speaker level audio. 

c. Low voltage DC control or power (less than 48VDC) 

4. Where raceway is to be EMT (conduit), wiring of differing 
classifications shall be run in separate conduit. Where raceway is 
to be an enclosure (rack, tray, wire trough, utility box) wiring of 
differing classifications which share the same enclosure shall be 
mechanically partitioned and separated by at least four (4) inches. 
Where Wiring of differing classifications must cross, they shall 
cross perpendicular to one another. 

5. Do not splice wiring anywhere along the entire length of the run. 
Make sure cables are fully insulated and shielded from each other 
and from the raceway for the entire length of the run. 

6. Do not pull wire through any enclosure where a change of raceway 
alignment or direction occurs. Do not bend wires to less than radius 
recommended by manufacturer. 

7. Replace the entire length of the run of any wire or cable that is 
damaged or abraided during installation. There are no acceptable 
methods of repairing damaged or abraided wiring. 

8. Use wire pulling lubricants and pulling tensions as recommended by 
the OEM. 

9. Use grommets around cut-outs and knock-outs where conduit or chase 
nipples are not installed. 

 10. Do not use tape-based or glue-based cable anchors. 

 11. Ground shields and drain wires to the Facility’s signal ground 
system as indicated by the drawings. 

 12. Field wiring entering equipment racks shall be terminated as 
follows: 

a. Provide OEM directed service loops at harness break-outs and at 
plates, panels and equipment. Loops should be sufficient to allow 
plates, panels and equipment to be removed for service and 
inspection. 


b. Line level and speaker level wiring may be terminated inside the 
equipment rack using specified terminal blocks (see “Products.”) 
Provide 15% spare terminals inside each rack. Microphone level 
wiring may only be terminated at the equipment served. 

c. If specified terminal blocks are not designed for rack mounting, 
utilize ¾” plywood or 1/8” thick aluminum plates/blank panels as 
a mounting surface. Do not mount on the bottom of the rack. 

d. Employ permanent strain relief for any cable with an outside 
diameter of 1” or greater. 

 13. Use only balanced audio circuits unless noted otherwise directed 
and indicated on the drawings. 

 14. Make all connections as follows: 

a. Make all connections using rosin-core solder or mechanical 
connectors appropriate to the application. 

b. For crimp-type connections, use only tools that are specified by 
the manufacturer for the application. 

c. Use only insulated spade lugs on screw terminals. Spade lugs 
shall be sized to fit the wire gauge. Do not exceed two lugs per 
terminal. 

d. Wire nuts, electrical tape or “Scotch Lock” connections are not 
acceptable for any application. 

15. Noise filters and surge protectors shall be provided for each 
equipment interface cabinet, switch equipment cabinet, control 
console, local, and remote active equipment locations to ensure 
protection from input primary AC power surges and noise glitches are 
not induced into low Voltage data circuits. 

16. Wires or cables previously approved to be installed outside of 
conduit, cable trays, wireways, cable duct, etc: 

a Only when specifically authorized as described herein, will wires 
or cables be identified and approved to be installed outside of 
conduit. The wire or cable runs shall be UL rated plenum and OEM 
certified for use in air plenums. 

b Wires and cables shall be hidden, protected, fastened and tied at 
600 mm (24 in.) intervals, maximum, as described herein to 
building structure. 

c Closer wire or cable fastening intervals may be required to 
prevents sagging, maintain clearance above suspended ceilings, 
remove unsightly wiring and cabling from view and discourage 


tampering and vandalism. Wire or cable runs, not provided in 
conduit, that penetrate outside building walls, supporting walls, 
and two hour fire barriers shall be sleeved and sealed with an 
approved fire retardant sealant. 

d Wire or cable runs to system components installed in walls (i.e.: 
volume attenuators, circuit controllers, signal, or data outlets, 
etc.) may, when specifically authorized by the RE, be fished 
through hollow spaces in walls and shall be certified for use in 
air plenum areas. 

e Completely test all of the cables after installation and replace 
any defective cables. 

f Wires or cables that are installed outside of buildings shall be 
in conduit, secured to solid building structures. If specifically 
approved, on a case by case basis, to be run outside of conduit, 
the wires or cables shall be installed, as described herein. The 
bundled wires or cables must: Be tied at not less than 460 mm (18 
in.) intervals to a solid building structure; have ultra violet 
protection and be totally waterproof (including all connections). 
The laying of wires or cables directly on roof tops, ladders, 
drooping down walls, walkways, floors, etc. is not allowed and 
will not be approved. 

E. Cable Installation - Cable Installation - In addition to the MANDATORY 
infrastructure requirements outlined in VA Construction Specifications 
27 10 00 – Structured TIP Communications Cabling, 27 11 00 – TIP 
Communications Rooms and Fittings and 27 15 00 – TIP Communications 
Horizontal and Vertical Cabling and the following additional practices 
shall be adhered too: 

1. Support cable on maximum 2’-0” centers. Acceptable means of cable 
support are cable tray, j-hooks, and bridal rings. Velcro wrap cable 
bundles loosely to the means of support with plenum rated Velcro 
straps. Plastic tie wraps are not acceptable as a means to bundle 
cables. 

2. Run cables parallel to walls. 

3. Install maximum of 10 cables in a single row of J-hooks. Provide 
necessary rows of J-hooks as required by the number of cables. 

4. Do not lay cables on top of light fixtures, ceiling tiles, 
mechanical equipment, or ductwork. Maintain at least 2’-0” clearance 
from all shielded electrical apparatus. 


5. All cables shall be tested after the total installation is fully 
complete. All test results are to be documented. All cables shall 
pass acceptable test requirements and levels. Contractor shall 
remedy any cabling problems or defects in order to pass or comply 
with testing. This includes the re-pull of new cable as required at 
no additional cost to the Owner. 

6. Ends of cables shall be properly terminated on both ends per 
industry and OEM’s recommendations. 

7. Provide proper temporary protection of cable after pulling is 
complete before final dressing and terminations are complete. Do not 
leave cable lying on floor. Bundle and tie wrap up off of the floor 
until you are ready to terminate. 

8. Terminate all conductors; no cable shall contain unterminated 
elements. Make terminations only at outlets and terminals. 

 9. Splices, Taps, and Terminations: Arrange on numbered terminal 
strips in junction, pull, and outlet boxes; terminal cabinets; and 
equipment enclosures. Cables may not be spliced. 

 10. Bundle, lace, and train conductors to terminal points without 
exceeding OEM's limitations on bending radii. Install lacing bars 
and distribution spools. 

 11. Cold-Weather Installation: Bring cable to room temperature before 
dereeling. Heat lamps shall not be used. 

 12. Cable shall not be run through structural members or be in 
contact with pipes, ducts, or other potentially damaging items. 

 13. Separation of Wires: (REFER TO RACEWAY INSTALLATION) Separate 
speaker-microphone, line-level, speaker-level, and power wiring 
runs. Install in separate raceways or, where exposed or in same 
enclosure, separate conductors at least 12 inches apart for speaker 
microphones and adjacent parallel power and telephone wiring. 
Separate other intercommunication equipment conductors as 
recommended by equipment manufacturer. 

14. Serve all cables as follows: 

a. Cover the end of the overall jacket with a 1” (minimum) length of 
transparent heat-shrink tubing. Cut unused insulated conductors 
2” (minimum) past the heat-shrink, fold back over jacket and 
secure with cable-tie. Cut unused shield/drain wires 2” (minimum) 
past the Heatshrink and serve as indicated below. 


b. Cover shield/drain wires with heat-shrink tubing extending back 
to the overall jacket. Extend tubing ¼” past the end of unused 
wires, fold back over jacket and secure with cable tie. 

c. For each solder-type connection, cover the bare wire and solder 
connection with heat-shrink tubing. 

F. Labeling: Provide labeling in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA-606-A. All 
lettering for Nurse Call and/or Code Blue circuits shall be stenciled 
using laser printers. 

1. Cable and Wires (Hereinafter referred to as “Cable”): Cables shall 
be labeled at both ends in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA-606-A. 
Labels shall be permanent in contrasting colors. Cables shall be 
identified according to the System “Record Wiring Diagrams.” 

2. Equipment: System equipment shall be permanently labeled with 
contrasting plastic laminate or Bakelite material. System equipment 
shall be labeled on the face of the unit corresponding to its 
source. 

a. Clearly, consistently, logically and permanently mark switches, 
connectors, jacks, relays, receptacles and electronic and other 
equipment. 

b. Engrave and paint fill all receptacle panels using 1/8” (minimum) 
high lettering and contrasting paint. 

c. For rack-mounted equipment, use engraved Lamacoid labels with 
white 1/8” (minimum) high lettering on black background. Label 
the front and back of all rack-mounted equipment. 

3. Conduit, Cable Duct, and/or Cable Tray: The Contractor shall label 
all conduit, duct and tray, including utilized GFE, with permanent 
marking devices or spray painted stenciling a minimum of 3 meters 
(10 ft.) identifying it as the System. In addition, each enclosure 
shall be labeled according to this standard. 

4. Termination Hardware: The Contractor shall label TCOs and patch 
panel connections using color coded labels with identifiers in 
accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA-606-A and the “Record Wiring Diagrams.” 

5. Where multiple pieces of equipment reside in the same rack group, 
clearly and logically label each indicating to which room, channel, 
receptacle location, etc. they correspond. 

6. Permanently label cables at each end, including intra-rack 
connections. Labels shall be covered by the same, transparent heatshrink 
tubing covering the end of the overall jacket. Alternatively, 


computer generated labels of the type which include a clear 
protective wrap may be used. 

7. Contractor’s name shall appear no more than once on each continuous 
set of racks. The Contractor’s name shall not appear on wall plates 
or portable equipment. 

8. Ensure each OEM supplied item of equipment has appropriate UL Labels 
/ Marks for the service the equipment is performed permanently 
attached / marked to a non-removal board in the unit. EQUIPMENT 
INSTALLED NOT BEARING THESE UL MARKS WILL NOT BE ALLOWED TO BE A 
PART OF THE SYSTEM. THE CONTRACTOR SHALL BEAR ALL COSTS REQUIRED TO 
PROVIDE REPLACEMENT EQUIPMENT WITH APPROVED UL MARKS. 

G. Conduit and Signal Ducts: When the Contractor and/or OEM determines 
additional system conduits and/or signal ducts are required in order to 
meet the system minimum performance standards outlined herein, the 
contractor shall provide these items as follows: 

1. Conduit: 

a. The Contractor shall employ the latest installation practices and 
materials. The Contractor shall provide conduit, junction boxes, 
connectors, sleeves, weather heads, pitch pockets, and associated 
sealing materials not specifically identified in this document as 
GFE. Conduit penetrations of walls, ceilings, floors, 
interstitial space, fire barriers, etc., shall be sleeved and 
sealed. 

b. All cables shall be installed in separate conduit and/or signal 
ducts (exception from the separate conduit requirement to allow 
Nurse Call and/or Code Blue cables to be installed in partitioned 
cable tray with voice cables may be granted in writing by the RE 
if requested). Conduits shall be provided in accordance with 
Section 27 05 33, RACEWAYS AND BOXES FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS, 
and NEC Articles 517 for Critical Care and 800 for Communications 
systems, at a minimum. 

c. When metal, plastic covered, etc., flexible cable protective 
armor or systems are specifically authorized to be provided for 
use in the System, their installation guidelines and standards 
shall be as specified herein, Section 27 05 33, RACEWAYS AND 
BOXES FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS, and the NEC. 

d. When ”interduct” flexible cable protective systems is 
specifically authorized to be provided for use in the System, 


it’s installation guidelines and standards shall be as the 
specified herein, Section 27 05 33, RACEWAYS AND BOXES FOR 
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS, and the NEC. 

e. Conduit fill (including GFE approved to be used in the system) 
shall not exceed 40%. Each conduit end shall be equipped with a 
protective insulator or sleeve to cover the conduit end, 
connection nut or clamp, to protect the wire or cable during 
installation and remaining in the conduit. Electrical power 
conduit shall be installed in accordance with the NEC. AC power 
conduit shall be run separate from signal conduit. 

f. Ensure that Critical Care Nurse Call and/or Code Blue 
Systems (as identified by NEC Section 517) are completely 
separated and protected from all other systems. 

2. Signal Duct, Cable Duct, or Cable Tray: 

a. The Contractor shall use GFE signal duct, cable duct, and/or 
cable tray, when identified and approved by the RE. 

b. Approved signal and/or cable duct shall be a minimum size of 100 
mm x 100 mm (4 in. X 4 in.) inside diameter with removable tops 
or sides, as appropriate. Protective sleeves, guides or barriers 
are required on all sharp corners, openings, anchors, bolts or 
screw ends, junction, interface and connection points. 

c. Approved cable tray shall be fully covered, mechanically and 
physically partitioned for multiple electronic circuit use, and 
be UL certified and labeled for use with telecommunication 
circuits and/or systems. The RE shall approve width and height 
dimensions. 

d. All cable junctions and taps shall be accessible. Provide an 8” X 
8” X 4” (minimum) junction box attached to the cable duct or 
raceway for installation of distribution system passive 
equipment. Ensure all equipment and tap junctions are accessible 

3.5 PROTECTION OF NETWORK DEVICES 

A. Contractor shall protect network devices during unpacking and 
installation by wearing manufacturer approved electrostatic discharge 
(ESD) wrist straps tied to chassis ground. The wrist strap shall meet 
OSHA requirements for prevention of electrical shock, should technician 
come in contact with high voltage. 


3.6 CUTTING, CLEANING AND PATCHING 

A. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to keep their work 
area clear of debris and clean area daily at completion of work. 

B. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to patch and paint any 
wall or surface that has been disturbed by the execution of this work. 

C. The Contractor shall be responsible for providing any additional 
cutting, drilling, fitting or patching required that is not indicated 
as provided by others to complete the Work or to make its parts fit 
together properly. 

D. The Contractor shall not damage or endanger a portion of the Work or 
fully or partially completed construction of the Owner or separate 
contractors by cutting, patching or otherwise altering such 
construction, or by excavation. The Contractor shall not cut or 
otherwise alter such construction by the Owner or a separate contractor 
except with written consent of the Owner and of such separate 
contractor; such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The 
Contractor shall not unreasonably withhold from the Owner or a separate 
Contractor the Contractor’s consent to cutting or otherwise altering 
the Work. 

E. Where coring of existing (previously installed) concrete is specified 
or required, including coring indicated under unit prices, the location 
of such coring shall be clearly identified in the field and the 
location shall be approved by the Project Manager prior to commencement 
of coring work. 

3.7 FIREPROOFING 

A. Where Nurse Call and/or Code Blue wires, cables and conduit penetrate 
fire rated walls, floors and ceilings, fireproof the opening. 

B. Provide conduit sleeves (if not already provided by electrical 
contractor) for cables that penetrate fire rated walls and 
Telecommunications Rooms floors and ceilings. After the cabling 
installation is complete, install fire proofing material in and around 
all conduit sleeves and openings. Install fire proofing material 
thoroughly and neatly. Seal all floor and ceiling penetrations. 

C. Use only materials and methods that preserve the integrity of the fire 
stopping system and its rating. 

D. Install fireproofing where low voltage cables are installed in the same 
manholes with high voltage cables; also cover the low voltage cables 
with arc proof and fireproof tape. 


E. Use approved fireproofing tape of the same type as used for the high 
voltage cables, and apply the tape in a single layer, one-half lapped 
or as recommended by the manufacturer. Install the tape with the coated 
side towards the cable and extend it not less than 25 mm (one inch) 
into each duct. 

F. Secure the tape in place by a random wrap of glass cloth tape. 

3.8 GROUNDING 

A. Ground Nurse Call and/or Code Blue cable shields and equipment to 
eliminate shock hazard and to minimize ground loops, commonmode 
returns, noise pickup, cross talk, and other impairments as specified 
in CFM Division 27, Section 27 05 26 – Grounding and Bonding for 
Communications Systems. 

B. Facility Signal Ground Terminal: Locate at main room or area signal 
ground within the room (i.e. head end and telecommunications rooms) or 
area(s) and indicate each signal ground location on the drawings. 

C. Extend the signal ground to inside each equipment cabinet and/or rack. 
Ensure each cabinet and/or rack installed item of equipment is 
connected to the extended signal ground. Isolate the signal ground 
from power and major equipment grounding systems. 

D. When required, install grounding electrodes as specified in CFM 
Division 26, Section 26 05 26 –Grounding and Bonding for Electrical 
Systems. 

E. Do not use “3rd or 4th” wire internal electrical system conductors for 
communications signal ground. 

F. Do not connect the signal ground to the building’s external lightning 
protection system. 

G. Do Not “mix grounds” of different systems. 

H. Insure grounds of different systems are installed as to not 
violate OSHA Safety and NEC installation requirements for protection of 
personnel. 

PART 4 – TESTING / GUARANTY / TRAINING 

4.0 SYSTEM LISTING 

The Nurses Call System is NFPA listed as an “Emergency” 
Communication system. Where Code Blue signals are 
transmitted, that listing is elevated to “Life 
Support/Safety.” Therefore, the following testing and 
guaranty provisions are the minimum to be performed and 
provided by the contractor and Warranted by the OEM. 


4.1 PROOF OF PERFORMANCE TESTING 

A. Intermediate Testing: 

1. After completion of 30 – 40% of the installation of a head end 
cabinet(s) and equipment, one master stations, local and remote 
stations, treatment rooms, and prior to any further work, this 
portion of the system must be pretested, inspected, and 1certified. 
Each item of installed equipment shall be checked to ensure 
appropriate UL Listing and Certification Labels are affixed as 
required by NFPA -Life Safety Code 101-3.2 (a) & (b), UL Nurse Call 
Standard 1069 and JCHCO evaluation guidelines, and proper 
installation practices are followed. The intermediate test shall 
include a full operational test. 

2. All inspections and tests shall be conducted by an OEM-certified 
contractor representative and witnessed by TVE-005OP3B if there is 
no local Government Representative that processes OEM and VA 
approved Credentials to inspect and certify the system. The results 
of the inspection will be officially recorded by the Government 
Representative and maintained on file by the RE, until completion of 
the entire project. The results will be compared to the Acceptance 
Test results. An identical inspection may be conducted between the 
65 - 75% of the system construction phase, at the direction of the 
RE. 

B. Pretesting: 

1. Upon completing installation of the Nurse Call and/or Code Blue 
System, the Contractor shall align, balance, and completely pretest 
the entire system under full operating conditions. 

2. Pretesting Procedure: 

a. During the System Pretest the Contractor shall verify (utilizing 
approved test equipment) that the System is fully operational and 
meets all the System performance requirements of this standard. 

b. The Contractor shall pretest and verify that all PSM System 
functions and specification requirements are met and operational, 
no unwanted aural effects, such as signal distortion, noise 
pulses, glitches, audio hum, poling noise, etc. are present. At a 
minimum, each of the following locations shall be fully 
pretested: 

1) Central Control Cabinets. 

2) Nurse Control Stations. 


a) Master Stations 

b) Patient Stations 

c) Staff Stations 

d) Emergency Stations 

e) Code Blue Stations 

3) Dome Lights. 

a) Patient Rooms 

b) Corridors 

c) Intersectional 

4) STRs 

5) Local and Remote Enunciation Panels (code blue). 

6) Electrical Supervision Panels/Functions/locations. 

7) All Networked locations. 

8) System interface locations (i.e. wireless, PA, telephone, 
etc.). 

9) System trouble reporting. 

10) System electrical supervision. 

11) UPS operation. 

12) Primary / Emergency AC Power Requirements 

13) Extra Auxiliary Generator Requirements. 

14) NSs. 

3. The Contractor shall provide four (4) copies of the recorded system 
pretest measurements and the written certification that the System 
is ready for the formal acceptance test shall be submitted to the 
RE. 

C. Acceptance Test: 

1. After the Nurse Call and/or Code Blue System has been pretested and 
the Contractor has submitted the pretest results and certification 
to the RE, then the Contractor shall schedule an acceptance test 
date and give the RE 15 working days written notice prior to the 
date the acceptance test is expected to begin. The System shall be 
tested in the presence of a TVE 005OP3B and OEM certified 
representatives. The System shall be tested utilizing the approved 
test equipment to certify proof of performance and Life Safety / 
Critical Service compliance. The tests shall verify that the total 
System meets all the requirements of this specification. The 
notification of the acceptance test shall include the expected 
length (in time) of the test. 


2. The acceptance test shall be performed on a "go-no-go" basis. Only 
those operator adjustments required to show proof of performance 
shall be allowed. The test shall demonstrate and verify that the 
installed System does comply with all requirements of this 
specification under operating conditions. The System shall be rated 
as either acceptable or unacceptable at the conclusion of the test. 
Failure of any part of the System that precludes completion of 
system testing, and which cannot be repaired in four (4) hours, 
shall be cause for terminating the acceptance test of the System. 
Repeated failures that result in a cumulative time of eight (8) 
hours to affect repairs shall cause the entire System to be declared 
unacceptable. 

3. Retesting of the entire System shall be rescheduled at the 
convenience of the Government and costs borne by the Contractor at 
the direction of the SRE. 

D. Acceptance Test Procedure: 

1. Physical and Mechanical Inspection: 

a. The TVE 005OP3B Representative will tour all major areas where 
the Nurse Call and/or Code Blue System and all sub-systems are 
completely and properly installed to insure they are 
operationally ready for proof of performance testing. A system 
inventory including available spare parts will be taken at this 
time. Each item of installed equipment shall be checked to ensure 
appropriate UL certification labels are affixed. 

b. The System diagrams, record drawings, equipment manuals, TIP Auto 
CAD Disks, intermediate, and pretest results shall be formally 
inventoried and reviewed. 

c. Failure of the System to meet the installation requirements of 
this specification shall be grounds for terminating all testing. 

2. Operational Test: 

a. After the Physical and Mechanical Inspection, the central 
terminating and nurse call master control equipment shall be 
checked to verify that it meets all performance requirements 
outlined herein. A spectrum analyzer and sound level meter may be 
utilized to accomplish this requirement. 

b. Following the central equipment test, a pillow speaker (or on 
board speaker) shall be connected to the central terminating and 
nurse call master control equipment’s output tap to ensure there 


are no signal distortions such as intermodulation, data noise, 
popping sounds, erratic system functions, on any function. 

c. The distribution system shall be checked at each interface, 
junction, and distribution point, first, middle, and last 
intersectional, room, and bed dome light in each leg to verify 
that the nurse call distribution system meets all system 
performance standards. 

d. Each MATV outlet that is controlled by a nurse call pillow 
speaker shall be functionally tested at the same time utilizing 
the Contractor’s approved hospital grade HDTV receiver and TV 
remote control cable. 

e. The RED system and volume stepper switches shall be checked to 
insure proper operation of the pillow speaker, the volume stepper 
and the RED system (if installed). 

f. Additionally, each installed emergency, patient, staff, duty, 
panic station, intersectional, room, and bed dome light, power 
supply, code one, and remote annunciator panels shall be checked 
insuring they meet the requirements of this specification. 

g. Once these tests have been completed, each installed sub-system 
function shall be tested as a unified, functioning and fully 
operating system. The typical functions are: nurse follower, 
three levels of emergency signaling (i.e. flashing red emergency, 
flashing white patient emergency, flashing white or combination 
lights for staff emergency, separate flashing code blue), minimum 
of 10 minutes of UPS operation, memory saving, minimum of ten 
station audio paging, canceling emergency calls at each 
originating station only, and storage and prioritizing of calls. 

h. Individual Item Test: The TVE 005OP3B Representative will select 
individual items of equipment for detailed proof of performance 
testing until 100% of the System has been tested and found to 
meet the contents of this specification. Each item shall meet or 
exceed the minimum requirements of this document. 

3. Test Conclusion: 

a. At the conclusion of the Acceptance Test, using the generated 
punch list (or discrepancy list) the VA and the Contractor shall 
jointly agree to the results of the test, and reschedule testing 
on deficiencies and shortages with the RE. Any retesting to 


comply with these specifications will be done at the Contractor's 
expense. 

b. If the System is declared unacceptable without conditions, all 
rescheduled testing expenses will be borne by the Contractor. 

E. Acceptable Test Equipment: The test equipment shall furnished by the 
Contractor shall have a calibration tag of an acceptable calibration 
service dated not more than 12 months prior to the test. As part of the 
submittal, a test equipment list shall be furnished that includes the 
make and model number of the following type of equipment as a minimum: 

1. Spectrum Analyzer. 

2. Signal Level Meter. 

3. Volt-Ohm Meter. 

4. Sound Pressure Level (SPL) Meter. 

5. Oscilloscope. 

6. Pillow Speaker Test Set (Pillow Speaker with appropriate load and 
cross connections in lieu of the set is acceptable). 

7. Patient Push Button Cord Test Set. 

8. Patient Bed with connecting multiple conductor cord. 

4.2 WARRANTY 

A. Comply with FAR 52.246-21, except that warranty shall be as follows: 

B. Contractor’s Responsibility: 

1. The Contractor shall warranty that all provided material and 
equipment will be free from defects, workmanship and will remain so 
for a period of one year from date of final acceptance of the System 
by the VA. The Contractor shall provide OEM’s equipment warranty 
documents, to the RE (or Facility Contracting Officer if the 
Facility has taken procession of the building), that certifies each 
item of equipment installed conforms to OEM published 
specifications. 

2. The Contractor's maintenance personnel shall have the ability to 
contact the Contractor and OEM for emergency maintenance and 
logistic assistance, remote diagnostic testing, and assistance in 
resolving technical problems at any time. This contact capability 
shall be provided by the Contractor and OEM at no additional cost to 
the VA. 

3. All Contractor maintenance and supervisor personnel shall be fully 
qualified by the OEM and must provide two (2) copies of current and 


qualified OEM training certificates and OEM certification upon 
request. 

4. Additionally, the Contractor shall accomplish the following minimum 
requirements during the two year guaranty period: 

a. Response Time during the Two Year Guaranty Period: 

1) The RE (or Facility Contracting Officer if the system has been 
turned over to the Facility) is the Contractor’s ONLY OFFICIAL 
reporting and contact official for nurse call system trouble 
calls, during the guaranty period. 

2) A standard work week is considered 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. or 
as designated by the RE (or Facility Contracting Officer), 
Monday through Friday exclusive of Federal Holidays. 

3) The Contractor shall respond and correct on-site trouble calls, 
during the standard work week to: 

a) A routine trouble call within one (1) working day of its 
report. A routine trouble is considered a trouble which 
causes a pillow speaker or cordset, one (1) master nurse 
control station, patient station, emergency station, or 
dome light to be inoperable. 

b) Routine trouble calls in critical emergency health care 
facilities (i.e., cardiac arrest, intensive care units, 
etc.) shall also be deemed as an emergency trouble call. 
The RE (or Facility Contracting Officer) shall notify the 
Contractor of this type of trouble call. 

c) An emergency trouble call within four hours of its report. 
An emergency trouble is considered a trouble which causes a 
sub-system (ward), distribution point, terminal cabinet, or 
code one system to be inoperable at anytime. 

4) If a Nurse Call and/or Code Blue/ component failure cannot be 
corrected within four (4) hours (exclusive of the standard 
work time limits), the Contractor shall be responsible for 
providing alternate nurse call equipment. The alternate 
equipment/system shall be operational within a maximum of 20 
hours after the four (4) hour trouble shooting time and 
restore the effected location operation to meet the System 
performance standards. If any sub-system or major system 
trouble cannot be corrected within one working day, the 
Contractor shall furnish and install compatible substitute 


equipment returning the System or sub-system to full 
operational capability, as described herein, until repairs are 
complete. 

b. Required On-Site Visits during the Two Year Guaranty Period 

1) The Contractor shall visit, on-site, for a minimum of eight 
(8) hours, once every 12 weeks, during the guaranty period, to 
perform system preventive maintenance, equipment cleaning, and 
operational adjustments to maintain the System according the 
descriptions identified in this document. 

2) The Contractor shall arrange all Facility visits with the RE 
(or Facility Contracting Officer) prior to performing the 
required maintenance visits. 

3) Preventive maintenance shall be performed by the Contractor in 
accordance with the OEM's recommended practice and service 
intervals during non-busy time agreed to by the RE (or 
Facility Contracting Officer) and Contractor. 

4) The preventive maintenance schedule, functions and reports 
shall be provided to and approved by the RE (or Facility 
Contracting Officer). 

5) The Contractor shall provide the RE (or Facility Contracting 
Officer) a type written report itemizing each deficiency found 
and the corrective action performed during each required visit 
or official reported trouble call. The Contractor shall 
provide the RE with sample copies of these reports for review 
and approval at the beginning of the Acceptance Test. The 
following reports are the minimum required: 

a) The Contractor shall provide a monthly summary all 
equipment and sub-systems serviced during this warranty 
period to RE (or Facility Contracting Officer) by the fifth 
(5th) working day after the end of each month. The report 
shall clearly and concisely describe the services rendered, 
parts replaced and repairs performed. The report shall 
prescribe anticipated future needs of the equipment and 
systems for preventive and predictive maintenance. 

b) The Contractor shall maintain a separate log entry for each 
item of equipment and each sub-system of the System. The 
log shall list dates and times of all scheduled, routine, 
and emergency calls. Each emergency call shall be 


described with details of the nature and causes of 
emergency steps taken to rectify the situation and specific 
recommendations to avoid such conditions in the future. 

6) The RE (or Facility Contracting Officer) shall convey to the 
Facility Engineering Officer, two (2) copies of actual reports 
for evaluation. 

a) The RE (or Facility Contracting Officer) shall ensure a 
copy of these reports is entered into the System’s official 
acquisition documents. 

b) The Facility Chief Engineer shall ensure a copy of these 
reports is entered into the System’s official technical 
record documents. 

C. Work Not Included: Maintenance and repair service shall not include the 
performance of any work due to improper use; accidents; other vendor, 
contractor, or owner tampering or negligence, for which the Contractor 
is not directly responsible and does not control. The Contractor shall 
immediately notify the RE or Facility Contracting Officer in writing 
upon the discovery of these incidents. The RE or Facility Contracting 
Officer will investigate all reported incidents and render 

4.3 TRAINING 

A. Provide thorough training of all nursing staff assigned to those 
nursing units receiving new networked nurse/patient communications 
equipment. This training shall be developed and implemented to address 
two different types of staff. Floor nurses/staff shall receive training 
from their perspective, and likewise, unit secretaries (or any person 
whose specific responsibilities include answering patient calls and 
dispatching staff) shall receive operational training from their 
perspective. A separate training room will be set up that allows this 
type of individualized training utilizing in-service training unit, 
prior to cut over of the new system. 

B. Provide the following minimum training times and durations: 

1. 48 hours prior to opening for nursing staff (in 8-hour increments) – 
split evenly over 3 weeks and day and night shifts. Coordinate 
schedule with Owner. 

2. 32 hours during the opening week for nursing staff – both day and 
night shifts. 

3. 24 hours for supervisors and system administrators. 


5.0 ATTACHMENTS 

 A. The following items are required as a part of the system: 

 1. COTS Documents: 

a. 



 CHECKLIST FOR SOFTWARE LICENSING AGREEMENTS 
(For use in commercial item acquisition [COTS] conforming to – FAR Part 12) 
The Government may not be able to accept standard commercial licensing agreement without modification; you must 
negotiate terms and conditions so it is consistent with the FAR and the VAAR. 
Is the license (check all that apply): Yes No 
Exclusive 
Non-exclusive 
Perpetual 
Limited term 
If limited term, state the period (months or years): 
If limited term, is there an automatic renewal provision? 
CPU based 
If CPU based, state number of machines and whether simultaneous use is permitted: 
Site license 
If site license, state the site/location: 
Network license 
Other basis (e.g., # of users, # of transactions, etc.) 
(state specifics) 
Applicable to only the current version (doesn’t apply to future versions) 
Software maintenance included at no extra cost 
Allow for office relocation or transfer 
Allow copying for backup or archival purpose 
Allow no cost copy at disaster recovery site 
Restricted on Use: (see note below) 
Restricted on the processing of data by or for user’s subsidiaries and affiliates 
Restricted on processing of third party data (or use in service bureau) 
Restricted on network use 
Restricted on site and equipment limitations 
Restricted on number of users (e.g., cannot exceed ______________ # of users) 
Terms and Conditions that may need to be negotiated: Yes No 
Does the license prohibit use of the software outside of the Government? 
If yes, this needs to be deleted/modified if other Government contractors need access to the software (as GFP) to fulfill 
obligations of their own contracts. 
Does license state that the software is Year 2000 compliant or include a Year 2000 warranty? 
If no, must ensure it is compliant per FAR 39 or include a Y2K warranty. 
Does the license state that it provides no warranties or guarantees of any kind? 
If yes, need to determine whether additional warranty would be in the best interest of the Government. 
Does the license warrant that the software does not contain any code (e.g., virus) that will disable the software, and if such code 
exists, that Licensor agrees to indemnify the licensee (user) for all damages suffered as a result of such code? 
If no, need to negotiate for such warranty. 
Does the license allow access to source code? 
If no, negotiate for access if software will be modified or customized for the Government’s needs or if the Government intends to 
maintain the software itself. 
Does the license require Licensor to deposit source code in escrow account? 
If no and source code is needed, consider negotiating for this provision, and state what “release conditions” are. 
Does the license allow the Government to hold the rights to customized code and to the data that the software manipulates? 
If no, negotiate for the rights if the Government (customer) requires them. 
Does the license authorize us to copy user manuals for internal purposes? 
If no, negotiate for authorization if multiple copies must be made for our internal use or ensure that the vendor supplies 
adequate number of copies. May also negotiate for updated manuals at periodic intervals, e.g., with each major update. 
Does the license state that licensee modifications to the software void all warranties? 
If yes, ensure that the vendor still warrants the unmodified portions. 
Does the license include clauses that prohibit needed uses of software, restrict the use of output from the software, or 
inappropriately burden the operation of the computer facilities? 
If yes, need to negotiate better terms and conditions. 
Is the dispute clause in the license consistent with FAR 52.233-1, Disputes Clause? 
If no, then need to modify license to be consistent with FAR. 
Does the default clause in the license allow for the Government to terminate for convenience or for cause, consistent with FAR 
52.212-4(l) or FAR 52.212-4(m)? 
If no, then need to modify license to be consistent with FAR Part 12 (not FAR Part 49). 


 

b. 


SOLICITATION/CONTRACT/ORDER FOR COMMERCIAL ITEMS 

1. REQUISITION NUMBER 

 

PAGE 1 OF 

 
7 

OFFEROR TO COMPLETE BLOCKS 12, 17, 23, 24, & 30 

 2. CONTRACT NO. 

 

 

3. 
AWARD/EFFECTI 
VE 

 DATE 

 SEE BLOCK 
31C 

4. ORDER NUMBER 

 

 

5. SOLICITATION NO. 

 

 

6. SOLICITATION 
ISSUE 

 DATE 

 

 7. FOR 
SOLICITATION 

 INFORMATION 
CALL: 

 

 

a. NAME 

 

b. TELEPHONE NUMBER 
(No collect calls) 

 

 

8. OFFER DUE 
DATE/ 

 LOCAL TIME 

 03/25/04 @ 
3:00 PM EDT 

 9. ISSUED BY: 

CODE 

 

10. THIS 
ACQUISITION IS 

. UNRESTRICTED 

 SETASIDE: 
100 % FOR 

 SMALL 
BUSINESS 

. HUBZONE 
SMALL 

 BUSINESS 

. 8(A) 

 

NAICS: 541511 

SIZE STANDARD: 

11. DELIVERY 
FOR 

 FOB 
DESTINATION 

 UNLESS 
BLOCK IS 

 MARKED 

. SEE 
SCHEDULE 

12. DISCOUNT 
TERMS 

 

 

 

. 13a. THIS CONTRACT IS A 
RATED ORDER 

UNDER DPAS (15 CFR 700) 

13b. RATING 

14. METHOD OF SOLICITATION 

 RFQ IFB 
RFP 

 15. DELIVER TO 

 
CODE 

 

16. ADMINISTERED BY 

CODE 

 

 

 

 

See #9 above 

 17a. CONTRACTOR/ 
CODE 

 OFFEROR 

 

FACILI 
TY 

 CODE 

 

18a. PAYMENT WILL BE 
MADE BY 

CODE 

 

 

 

 

 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

 Department of Veterans Affairs 

 FMS 

 P.O. Box 149971 

 Austin, TX 78714-8971 

 

 TELEPHONE NO: 703.246-0392 

 

 

 

 

 . 17b. CHECK IF REMITTANCE IS DIFFERENT 
AND PUT SUCH ADDRESS IN 

 OFFER 

18b. SUBMIT INVOICES TO ADDRESS SHOWN IN BLOCK 
18a. UNLESS BLOCK BELOW 

 IS CHECKED SEE ADDENDUM 

19. 

 ITEM NO. 

20. 

 SCHEDULE OF SUPPLIES/SERVICES 

21. 

QUANTI 
TY 

22. 

UNI 
T 

23. 

UNIT 
PRICE 

24. 

AMOUNT 

 

 

 

 

 

 




 

See page 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Use Reverse and/or (Attach Additional 
Sheets as Necessary) 

 

 

 

 

 25. ACCOUNTING AND APPROPRIATION DATA 

26. TOTAL AWARD AMOUNT 
(For Govt. Use Only) 

 

 

 

 . 27a. SOLICITATION INCORPORATES BY REFERENCE FAR 52.212-1, 52.212-4. 
FAR 52.212-3 AND 52.212-5 ARE ATTACHED. ADDENDA 

. 
ARE 

. ARE NOT 
ATTACHED. 

 27b. CONTRACT/PURCHASE ORDER INCORPORATES BY REFERENCE FAR 52.212-4, 
52.227-14, 52.227-16, and 52.227-19. ADDENDA 

ARE 

. ARE NOT 
ATTACHED. 

 

 28. CONTRACTOR IS REQUIRED TO SIGN THIS 
DOCUMENT AND RETURN __1_ 

 COPIES TO ISSUING OFFICE. CONTRACTOR 
AGREES TO FURNISH AND DELIVER 

 ALL ITEMS SET FORTH OR OTHERWISE 
IDENTIFIED ABOVE AND ON ANY ADDITIONAL 

 SHEETS SUBJECT TO THE TERMS AND 
CONDITIONS SPECIFIED HEREIN. 

. 29. AWARD OF CONTRACT: REF. 
__________________OFFER 

 DATED___ __________. YOUR OFFER ON 
SOLICITATION (BLOCK 5), 

 INCLUDING ANY ADDITIONS OR CHANGES 
WHICH ARE SET FORTH 

 HEREIN, IS ACCEPTED AS TO ITEMS: 

 30A. SIGNATURE OF OFFEROR/CONTRACTOR 

31a. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA (SIGNATURE OF 
CONTRACTING OFFICER) 

 

 

 30b. NAME AND TITLE OF SIGNER 
(Type or Print) 

30c. DATE 
SIGNED 

31b. NAME OF CONTRACTING 
OFFICER (Type or Print) 

31c. DATE 
SIGNED 

 

 

 

 

Contracting Officer 

 

 

 AUTHORIZED FOR LOCAL 
REPRODUCTION 

 PREVIOUS EDITION IS NOT 
USABLE 

COMPUTER-GENERATED 

 

STANDARD FORM 1449 
(REV. 4/2002) 

 Prescribed By GSA 
- FAR (48CFR) 53.212 

19. 

 ITEM NO. 

20. 

 SCHEDULE OF SUPPLIES/SERVICES 

21. 

QUANTI 
TY 

22. 

UNI 
T 

23. 

UNIT 
PRICE 

24. 

AMOUNT 




 

This Contract is Firm Fixed Price (FFP). The 
Contractor is required to provide the software, 
software license, and software maintenance services for 
the computer software identified below. Distribution 
of maintenance copies shall be accomplished by using an 
appropriate magnetic, electronic or printed media. 
Software maintenance includes periodic updates, 
enhancements and corrections to the software, and 
reasonable technical support, all of which are 
customarily provided by the Contractor to its 
customers. 

 

The name of the software is: Word 2008 

License Type: Perpetual or Term????? 

Software Manufacturer: Microsoft 

 

Governing Law. Federal law and regulations, including 
the Federal Acquisition Regulations (“FAR”), shall 
govern this Contract or Order (Contract/Order). 
Commercial license agreements may be made a part of 
this Contract/Order but only if both parties expressly 
make them an addendum. If the commercial license 
agreement is not made an addendum, it shall not apply, 
govern, be a part of or have any effect whatsoever on 
this Contract/Order; this includes, but is not limited 
to, any agreement embedded in the computer software 
(clickwrap) or any agreement that is otherwise 
delivered with or provided to the Government with the 
commercial computer software or documentation 
(shrinkwrap), or any other license agreement otherwise 
referred to in any document. If a commercial license 
agreement is made an addendum, only those provisions 
addressing data rights regarding the Government’s use, 
duplication and disclosure of data (e.g., restricted 
computer software) are included and made a part of this 
Contract/Order, and only to the extent that those 
provisions are not duplicative or inconsistent with 
Federal law, Federal regulation or the incorporated FAR 
clauses; those provisions in the commercial license 
agreement that do not address data rights regarding the 
Government’s use, duplication and disclosure of data 
shall not be included or made a part of the 
Contract/Order. Federal law and regulation, including 
without limitation, the Contract Disputes Act (41 
U.S.C. §601-613), the Anti-Deficiency Act (31 U.S.C. 
§1341 et seq.), the Competition in Contracting Act (41 
U.S.C. §251, et seq), the Prompt Payment Act (31 U.S.C. 
§3901, et seq.) and FAR clauses 52.212-4, 52.227-14, 
52.227-19 shall supersede, control and render 
ineffective any inconsistent, conflicting or 
duplicative provision in any commercial license 
agreement. In the event of conflict between this 
clause and any provision in the Contract/Order or the 
commercial license agreement or elsewhere, the terms of 
this clause shall prevail. Claims of patent or 
copyright infringement brought against the Government 
as a party shall be defended by the U.S. Department of 
Justice (DOJ). 28 U.S.C. § 516. At the discretion of 
DOJ, the Contractor may be allowed reasonable 
participation in the defense of the litigation. Any 
additional changes to the Contract/Order must be made 
by contract modification (Standard Form 30). Nothing 
in this Contract/Order or any commercial license 
agreement shall be construed as a waiver of sovereign 

 

 




1 

Microsoft Word 2008 Software License, Part 
No. 9891-7069. 

Software may be installed on four separate 
personal computers and be used by any VA 
employee or support service contractor. 

Licenses are perpetual. 

4 

EA 

$10,000.0 
0 

$40,000.00 

2 

12 months of Standard Microsoft Word 
Software Maintenance and Technical Support 
Services for the software being acquired 
under CLIN 1; Part No. 9891-7069. 

4 

EA 

$2,500.00 

$10,000.00 

 

Total 

 

 

 

$50,000.00 

 32a. QUANTITY IN COLUMN 21 HAS BEEN 

 RECEIVED INSPECTED ACCEPTED, AND CONFORMS TO THE CONTRACT, 
EXCEPT AS NOTED: 

 

 32b. SIGNATURE OF AUTHORIZED 
GOVT. REPRESENTATIVE 

 

32c. DATE 

 

32d. PRINTED NAME AND TITLE OF 
AUTHORIZED GOVERNMENT 

 REPRESENTATIVE 

 32e. MAILING ADDRESS OF AUTHORIZED GOVERNMENT 
REPRESENTATIVE 

 

32f. TELEPHONE NO. OF AUTHORIZED 
GOVERNMENT REPRESENTATIVE 

 

32g. E-MAIL OF AUTHORIZED GOVERNMENT 
REPRESENTATIVE 

 

 33. SHIP 
NUMBER 

34. VOUCHER 
NUMBER 

35. AMOUNT VERIFIED 

 CORRECT FOR 

36. PAYMENT 

 COMPLETE 
PARTIAL FINAL 

37. CHECK 
NUMBER 

 PARTIAL 
FINAL 

 38. S/R 
ACCOUNT NUMBER 

 

39. S/R VOUCHER 
NUMBER 

 

40. PAID BY 

 

 41a. I CERTIFY THIS ACCOUNT IS CORRECT 
AND PROPER FOR PAYMENT 

42a. RECEIVED BY (Print) 

 

 41b. SIGNATURE AND TITLE OF 
CERTIFYING OFFICER 

41c. DATE 

 

 

42b. RECEIVED AT (Location) 

 

42c. DATE REC’D 
(YY/MM/DD) 

42d. TOTAL CONTAINERS 

 

 

 

 STANDARD FORM 
1449 (REV. 4/2002) BACK 



ADDENDUM A –ADDITIONAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR CONTRACT # _______________OR 
ORDER#________________ 

 

A.1 Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) Incorporated by Reference. The 
Contractor agrees to comply with the following FAR clauses, which the 
Contracting Officer has indicated as being incorporated in this 
Contract/Order by reference, to implement provisions of law or executive 
orders applicable to acquisitions of this nature, to implement department 
policy or to clarify the Government’s requirement. Copies of clauses in full 
text will be provided on request. FAR Clauses can be viewed at 
http://www.arnet.gov/far/. 

 


1) FAR 52.212-4, Contract Terms and Conditions-Commercial Items (Oct 
2003) 
2) FAR 52.227-14, Rights in Data—General (Dec 2007), Alt III 
3) FAR 52.227-16, Additional Data Requirements (Jun 1987) 
4) FAR 52.227-19, Commercial Computer Software License (Dec 2007) 


 

A.2 Contracting Officer’s Authority. The Contracting Officer is the only 
person authorized to make or approve any changes in any of the requirements 
of this Contract, and notwithstanding any provisions contained elsewhere in 
this Contract/Order, the said authority remains solely within the Contracting 
Officer. In the event the Contractor makes any changes at the direction of 
any person other than the Contracting Officer, the changes will be considered 
to have been made without authority and no adjustment will be made in the 
contract price to cover any increase in costs incurred as a result thereof. 

 

A.3 VAAR 852.270-1 Representatives of Contracting Officers (APR 1984). The 
Contracting Officer reserves the right to designate representatives to act 
for him/her in furnishing technical guidance and advice or generally 
supervise the work to be performed under this Contract/Order. Such 
designation will be in writing and will define the scope and limitations of 
the designee’s authority. A copy of the designation shall be furnished the 
Contractor. 

 

A.4 VAAR 852.270-4 Commercial Advertising (NOV 1984). The Contractor will 
not advertise the award of this Contract/Order in his/her commercial 
advertising in such a manner as to state or imply that the Department of 
Veterans Affairs endorses a product, project or commercial line of endeavor. 

 

A.5 VAAR 852.237-70 Contractor Responsibilities (APR 1984) The Contractor 
shall obtain all necessary licenses and/or permits required to perform this 
work. He/she shall take all reasonable precautions necessary to protect 
persons and property from injury or damage during the performance of the 
Contract/Order. He/she shall be responsible for any injury to 
himself/herself, his/her employees, as well as for any damage to personal or 
public property that occurs during the performance of the Contract/Order that 
is caused by his/her employees fault or negligence, and shall maintain 
personal liability and property damage insurance having coverage for a limit 
as required by the laws of the state where services are performed. Further, 
it is agreed that any negligence of the Government, its officers, agents, 
servants and employees, shall not be the responsibility of the Contractor 
hereunder with the regard to any claims, loss, damage, injury, and liability 
resulting there from. 

 

A.6 Indemnification. The Contractor shall save and hold harmless and 
indemnify the Government against any and all liability claims, and cost of 
whatsoever kind and nature for injury to or death of any person or persons 
and for loss or damage to any Contractor property or property owned by a 
third party occurring in connection with or in any way incident to or arising 
out of the occupancy, use service, operation, or performance of work under 
the terms of the Contract/Order, resulting in whole or in part from the acts 
or omissions of the Contractor, any subcontractor, or any employee, agent, or 
representative of the Contractor or subcontractor. 

 

A.7 Government’s Liability. The Government shall not be liable for any 
injury to the Contractor's personnel or damage to the Contractor's property 
unless such injury or damage is due to negligence on the part of the 


Government and is recoverable under the Federal Torts Claims Act, or pursuant 
to other Federal statutory authority. 

 

A.10 Uniform Computer Information Transaction Act (UCITA). UCITA is not 
applicable to the Contract/Order. 

 

A.11 Software License and Software Maintenance Subscription and Technical 
Support. 

 

(1) Definitions. 

(a) Licensee. The term “licensee” shall mean the U.S. Department of 
Veterans Affairs (“VA”) and is synonymous with “Government.” 
(b) Licensor. The term “licensor” shall mean the software 
manufacturer of the computer software being acquired. The term 
“Contractor” is the company identified in Block 17a on the 
SF1449. If the Contractor is a reseller and not the Licensor, 
the Contractor remains responsible for performance under this 
Contract. 
(c) Software. The term “software” shall mean the licensed computer 
software product(s) cited in the Schedule of Supplies (Page 2). 
(d) Maintenance. The term “maintenance” is the process of enhancing 
and optimizing software, as well as remedying defects. It shall 
include all new fixes, patches, releases, updates, versions and 
upgrades, as further defined below. 
(e) Technical Support. The term “technical support” refers to the 
range of services providing assistance for the software via the 
telephone, email, a website or otherwise. 
(f) Release or Update. The term “release” or “update” are terms that 
refer to a revision of software that contains defect corrections, 
minor enhancements or improvements of the software’s 
functionality. This is usually designated by a change in the 
number to the right of the decimal point (e.g., from Version 5.3 
to 5.4). An example of an update is the addition of new 
hardware. 
(g) Version or Upgrade. The term “version” or “upgrade” are terms 
that refer to a revision of software that contains new or 
improved functionality. This is usually designated by a change 
in the number to the left of the decimal point (e.g., from 
Version 5.4 to 6). 


 

(2) License. Grant of License and Term. 

 

(a) See also Addendum B. 
(b) Unless otherwise stated in the Schedule of Supplies/Services, the 
software license provided to the Government is a perpetual, 
nonexclusive license to use the software. 
(c) The license authorizes the Government to use the software in 
processing data for other federal agencies. 
(d) If the licensed software requires a password (or license key) to 
be operational, it shall be delivered with the software media and 
have no expiration date. 
(e) If the Government decides to outsource or contract its services, 
the Government may allow the outsourcer to use the licensed 
software solely to provide the services on its behalf. The 
outsourcer shall be bound by the provisions of this Contract 
relating to the use of the software. 



(f) If the software is for use in a networked environment, as may be 
reflected by the number of servers or users described in the 
Contract/Order, the license grant provided by the Contractor 
includes the Government’s use of the software in such 
environment. 
(g) Any dispute regarding the license grant or usage limitations 
shall be resolved in accordance with the Disputes Clause 
incorporated in FAR 52.212-4(d). 
(h) If the Government purchases additional licenses, the terms and 
conditions for those additional licenses (including technical 
support and upgrade subscription) shall be the same as agreed to 
in this Contract/Order, unless negotiated otherwise by mutual 
agreement of the parties. 
(i) The licensed software contains critical product functionality 
that meets the minimum needs of the Government and is the basis 
for the Government’s procurement of the software; consequently, 
the Contractor agrees that the Government has the right to 
successor products at no additional cost when functionality is 
later unbundled from the product licensed herein and bundled into 
a new or different product, provided the Government is current on 
maintenance. 
(j) If the Contractor is a reseller for the computer software being 
acquired under this Contract/Order, it is permissible for the 
actual software manufacturer (Licensor) to deliver the software 
directly to the Government. 
(k) All limitations of software usage are expressly stated in the SF 
1449 and Addendum A and Addendum B. 


 

(3) Software Maintenance Subscription and Technical Support. 


 

(a) See also Addendum B. 
(b) Software maintenance and technical support are included at the 
agreed upon price. However, if additional charges are assessed 
during the maintenance and technical support period as a result 
of negotiated changes in the license (e.g., CPU upgrades), the 
fee shall be by mutual agreement of the parties and any dispute 
thereof shall be resolved in accordance with the Disputes Clause 
incorporated herein at FAR 52.212-4(g). 
(c) If the Government desires to continue software maintenance and 
support beyond the period identified in this Contract/Order, the 
Government will issue a separate contract or order to renew 
annual maintenance and technical support. Conversely, if an 
order or contract to renew software maintenance and technical 
support is not received, no assumption by the Contractor shall be 
made that it has been renewed. It shall not be automatically 
renewed. 
(d) Unless otherwise agreed, for any new additional software that may 
be licensed, the Contractor shall provide for software 
maintenance and technical support for the first year of the 
license at no additional cost. 
(e) Unless otherwise agreed, the Contractor shall provide VA with 
software maintenance, which includes periodic updates, upgrades, 
enhancements and corrections to the software, and reasonable 
technical support, all of which are customarily provided by the 
Contractor to its customers so as to cause the software to 
perform according to its specifications, documentation or 
demonstrated claims. 



(f) Any telephone support provided by Contractor shall be at no 
additional cost. 
(g) All technical support services will be provided in a timely 
manner in accordance with the Contractor’s customary practice. 
However, prolonged delay in resolving software problems will be 
noted in the Government’s various past performance records on the 
Contractor (e.g., www.ppirs.gov). 
(h) If the Government allows the maintenance and/or technical support 
to lapse and subsequently wishes to reinstate maintenance and 
technical support, any reinstatement fee charged shall not exceed 
the amounts that would have been charged if the Government had 
not allowed it to lapse. 


 

A.12 Disabling Software Code. The Government requires delivery of computer 
software that does not contain any code that will, upon the occurrence or the 
nonoccurrence of any event, disable the software. Such code includes but is 
not limited to a computer virus, restrictive key, node lock, time-out or 
other function, whether implemented by electronic, mechanical, or other 
means, which limits or hinders the use or access to any computer software 
based on residency on a specific hardware configuration, frequency of 
duration of use, or other limiting criteria. If any such code is present, 
the Contractor agrees to indemnify the Government for all damages suffered as 
a result of a disabling caused by such code, and the Contractor agrees to 
remove such code upon the Government’s request at no extra cost to the 
Government. Inability of the Contractor to remove the disabling software 
code will be considered an inexcusable delay and a material breach of 
contract, and the Government may exercise its right to terminate for cause. 
In addition, the Government is permitted to remove the code as it deems 
appropriate and charge the Contractor for consideration for the time and 
effort in removing the code. 

 

A.13 Disaster Recovery Clause. Government hereby certifies to Contractor 
that it has a bona fide disaster plan with respect to the computer software 
programs used in its operations. The Contract/Order authorizes the 
Government's operation to maintain a second copy of software on tape for use 
at loading at sites that are not live (e.g. subscription-based disaster 
recovery services) for the sole purpose of duplicating or mirroring the 
software environment of the "primary" licenses at the designated licensed 
site and as described herein. Additionally, use of the software at the 
contingency sites must not include general access or any processing for 
program development or production. Contractor shall permit operation and 
testing of all licensed programs at the contingency sites as designated by 
the Government without prior approval and at no additional cost to the 
Government solely for the purpose of maintaining or implementing disaster 
recovery readiness including continuity of business operations. CPU’s, MIPS 
or MSU’s at these contingency sites are excluded from the total CPU’s, MIPS 
or MSU’s count included elsewhere in the Contract/Order and are not 
separately billable. Activation of operations at a contingency site shall be 
at Government's discretion. Government is authorized to install all software 
at the contingency sites for testing, problem resolution purposes, and to 
ensure there will be no operational delays in association with transition of 
workload from the designated licensed site to the contingency sites. Use of 
the software at the contingency sites in the event of a disaster shall 
continue until such time as normal processing can be resumed at the "primary" 
site regardless of the duration required. Nothing in the Contract/Order 
diminishes the Government's rights in accordance with the data rights 
clause(s). Any license keys, codes, or passwords required by the Contractor 


in order to use the software at the contingency sites shall be provided to 
the Government within 10 days of the Government’s request. 

 

A.14 NOTICE OF THE FEDERAL ACCESSIBILITY LAW AFFECTING ALL ELECTRONIC AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PROCUREMENTS (SECTION 508) 

 

On August 7, 1998, Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 was amended 
to require that when Federal departments or agencies develop, procure, 
maintain, or use Electronic and Information Technology, that they shall 
ensure it allows Federal employees with disabilities to have access to and 
use of information and data that is comparable to the access to and use of 
information and data by other Federal employees. 

 

Section 508 required the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
Board (Access Board) to publish standards setting forth a definition of 
electronic and information technology and the technical and functional 
criteria for such technology to comply with Section 508. These standards 
have been developed were published with an effective date of December 21, 
2000. Federal departments and agencies must develop all Electronic and 
Information Technology requirements to comply with the standards found in 36 
CFR 1194 .___*____ in performing this contract. (Fill in Section Number and 
Title) 

 

ADDENDUM B – STATEMENT OF WORK FOR CONTRACT #_____________________________ or 
ORDER#________________ 

 

 

B.1 License. BROADLY DESCRIBE COMPUTING ENVIRONMENT AND HOW VA INTENDS TO 
USE THE SOFTWARE, HOW ITS LICENSED, WHAT THE SOFTWARE IS EXPECTED TO DO, ETC. 
TO GET YOU STARTED: The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has a need for 
the computer software identified on the Schedule of Supplies/Services (page 
2) (software media and license) and software support services. The software 
will be installed onto multiple servers at the ITAC in Austin Texas for 
support/training/staging of the _____________________ Project. These are 
processor-based licenses that allow for unlimited users utilizing the 
processor(s). Contractor shall grant the Government the necessary license to 
accommodate this need. VA may move the software to any other location or 
hardware at any time. 

 

B.2 Maintenance. The Contractor will provide software maintenance services, 
which includes periodic updates, enhancements and corrections to the 
software, and reasonable technical support, all of which are customarily 
provided by the Contractor to its customers so as to cause the software to 
perform according to its specifications, documentation or demonstrated 
claims. Add detailed, specific maintenance and support information here. 
The Contractor will distribute maintenance updates or releases by using an 
appropriate magnetic, electronic, or printed media to the address in Block 15 
of page one, but to the attention of Joe Smith. Alternatively, the 
Contractor may offer access to maintenance copies through its website. All 
maintenance services will be provided in a timely manner in accordance with 
the Contractor’s customary practice. However, prolonged delay in resolving 
software problems will be noted in the Government’s various past performance 
records on the Contractor (e.g., www.ppirs.gov). 

 

2. MOU 


 Department of 
Veterans Affairs 
Memorandum 
Date: (Current Date) 
From: Department of Veterans Affairs 
Office of Telecommunications (005OP) 
Spectrum Management (005OP2H3 – Room 047)) 
Telecommunications Voice Engineering (005OP2H2) 
810 Vermont Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20420 
Subj: Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for Non - VA Licensed Wireless Operations 
To: Facility Director (00) 
(Address) 
(Address) 
1. The following circumstances are the minimum necessary for conditional use of Wireless 
Equipment / System (s) in VA Owned or Leased Facilities (here-in after referred to as 
‘the Facility’). VA Headquarters OI&T’s (005) Spectrum Management (005OP2H3), 
Telecommunications Voice Engineering, Special Communications (TVE - 005OP2H2) 
and Office of Cyber Security (OCIS – 0050P2) are the responsible entities insuring 
conformity of each requirement: 
a. Each item of equipment or system whose Radio Frequency (RF) equipment is listed 
under Consolidated Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 47 – Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC), Part 15, Chapter 7, Use of Non Licensed Devices must be 
installed and operated in a manner consistent with Part 15’s “Safety of Life” 
restrictions. This information is re-emphasized in CFR, Title 15 – Department of 
Commerce, Under the Information Technology Management Reform Act (Public 
Law 104-106), National Telecommunications Information Administration (NTIA) 
Manual of Regulations and Procedures for Federal Radio Frequency Management 
(aka ‘The Red Book’). 
b. FCC Part 15 listed RF devices shall not be Installed or used in areas where “Safety 
of Life” functions / operations are accomplished or where a ‘Code Blue’ enunciation 
may occur. A list of the minimum areas affected by this statement is provided as 
Attachment One. 
c. If external or internal interference is detected and cannot be corrected, the FCC Part 
15 Listed RF Equipment affected must be turned off until corrections and/or 
substitutions can be made. Contact VA’s Office of Spectrum Management (OSM – 
005OP2H3), 202 461-5301 for specific conditional approval(s) concerning this 
issue. 


3. Risk Assessment 

 

Department of 

Veterans Affairs 

 

Memorandum 



Date: (current date) 

 

From: Director (XXXXX) 

 Address 

 Address 

 Address 

 

 

Subj: VA Headquarters (VACO) Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Part 15 Listed “Non-Regulated 
Equipment Wireless Operations” 

 

 

To: Department of Veterans Affairs 

 Office of Telecommunications (005OP) 

 Spectrum Management (005OP2H3) 

 Telecommunications Voice Engineering (005OP2H2) 

 1335 East West Highway, 3rd Floor 

 Silver Spring, Maryland 20420 

 

 

1. We have received the subject VACO MOU (signed copy attached), and 
are pleased to provide the following information and comments for your 
review that includes our risks and risk-mitigation factors that 
prompted our Facility’s decision: 

a. RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION: 

(1) Background: 

(a) (name) VAMC (here-in-after referred to as “the 
Facility”) has used (OEM Mdl Nr©) for over 10 years to allow nurses 
in the telemetry studio to communicate with nurses at the patients’ 
bedside. This communication medium is a vital patient safety tool 
that allows for rapid response to the development of a potentially 
fatal arrhythmia such as ventricular tachycardia. The only 
information the telemetry technician states on the phone is “bed 109-2 
Smith has an alarm for XXXXX.” Last four is never communicated. In 
terms of the pager we have limited the information on the pager to 
sector, bed number and last name. We must include the last name as 
occasionally the patients are moved without the knowledge of the 
telemetry technician, if we were to have a patient mix up the page 
must contain the last name for safety reasons. Facility Management 
Services (FMS) has restricted paging access to the telemetry system 
only. Because pager access is restricted, only an administrator from 
Technology and Information Management (TIM) or FMS can troubleshoot a 
pager malfunction. 

VAMC (City), (State – ZIP Code), Unregulated FCC Equipment Use, Risk 
Assessment and Mitigation, Page Two 


(b) Because the phones are used 24X7 and have exceeded 
their life expectancy, many of them have begun to fail which creates a 
need to purchase newer models that will continue to insure system 
integrity. 

(c) Our Facility has been prevented from purchasing 
replacement phones because VACO now has updated security and 
Information Technology (IT) connection controls along with continuing 
FCC Part 15 restrictions (described in the attached MOU) on devices of 
which these wireless phones are but one example. These updated 
security and connection controls are in place to address risks related 
life safety, information security, personal privacy and IT system 
integrity. The FCC restrictions continue to warn against the use of 
“non-regulated radio / wireless based equipment in safety of life 
locations and functions.” Of note, these controls are intended to 
prevent use of these devices in areas especially where a code-blue 
annunciation might occur, yet our devices have been used in such areas 
for over 10 years and so far has not prevented a code-blue 
annunciation from happening. 

(d) Because the Facility does not have a near-term 
alternative to the current wireless phones, it now faces a set of 
competing risks. On the one hand are the risks of privacy, connection 
and interference or security breach(s) that are behind the controls in 
place for these devices. On the other hand are risks to patient 
safety if the current phones were to fail and telemetry nurses would 
lose the ability to rapidly communicate with nurses at the bedside. 
Our Facility does have a Life Safety approved Nurses Call / Code Blue 
hardwired system that is installed in those affected areas as the 
primary Code Blue Enunciation media. 

(2) SECURITY: 

(a) NEC provides a proprietary scrambling algorithm that 
is applied to handset registration / authentication and all 
communications. Every time a (OEM Mdl Nr©) user enters a designated 
area within the systems’ coverage; an automatic user authentication 
process is performed to confirm the device is authorized for service 
on the system. This information is scrambled using a proprietary 
coding scheme to prevent duplication. All voice conversations are 
also scrambled to enhance security. 

(b) The (OEM Mdl Nr©) has several built in security features 
in each of the wireless handsets are administered through the 
Facility’s Telephone Private Branch Exchange (PBX) administration 
tool; therefore, the PBX Administrator has full control over the (OEM 
Mdl Nr©) wireless phones, if one gets lost or stolen it can be 
disabled immediately. Because of this feature you cannot purchase a 
similar wireless phone and have it work on our network. These phones 
have a 50 ft radius from the Zone radio frequency (RF) transceiver; 
they can only be used within the hospital as there is no handoff via 
other cellular networks. 

(c) These items are not NIST FIPS compliant; but based on 
the aforementioned facts, we feel patient / staff privacy and HIPAA 
instructions have been and will continue to be met. 


(d) Our Facility will work with (OEM) and VACO’s Office of 
Cyber Security (Name and Phone Nr) to secure the appropriate NIST FIPS 
certifications will allow VA to issue a Official Approvals from the 
onset in the IT equipment / system procurement process. 

VAMC (City), (State – ZIP Code), Unregulated FCC Equipment Use, Risk 
Assessment and Mitigation, Page Three 

(3) RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) INTERFERENCE: 

(a) (OEM) engineers provided us with extensive 
information on the potential for RF along with electromagnetic (EM) 
interference to medical equipment within our Facility from the (OEM 
System) Wireless radio transceivers. 

1) Field Experience: Since introduction of the (OEM 
System) Wireless product in 1996, NEC has installed this system at 
many health care institutions across the spectrum of medical 
departments. In all this time there have been zero reports of either 
suspected or actual RF and EM interference. This includes the 
experience using these devices at Portland VAMC and our continued 
testing documentation is available for review if requested. 

2) Potential interference called Near Field Coupling: In 
these cases, an EM field emanating from one device may cause another 
device within its field area to malfunction. Typically the distances 
for these fields are less than six (6) inches. In attempts to 
mitigate these sources of interference, standards have been put in 
place, namely IEC 60601. This standard calls for devices susceptible 
to interference to provide shielding against fields of up to three (3) 
Volts per Meter. In contrast, the (OEM System) wireless products are 
classified under the FCC Part 15 rules as Class B unlicensed devices, 
and as such must meet very tight restrictions regarding field 
emissions of a maximum of from 100 to 500 micro (µ) Volts per Meter 
across the band of RFs from 30 Hz to 18 gHz. Thus, any medical device 
even marginally meeting the IEC Standard has not had problems with any 
near field emissions. 

3) Potential phenomenon known as Far Field Induced RFI: 
should be considered when studying RF and EM interference sources. In 
this case, a part of the device subject to interference (e.g., a wire, 
probe, or the casing itself) can inadvertently act as a receiving 
antenna for a signal transmitted from another device within close 
proximity (within 6 to 18 inches, depending on the source power 
levels). To realize this type of interference, the source transmitter 
power must be fairly strong to conduct through the inefficient nature 
of the unintended antenna of the receiving device, and the material 
acting as the antenna must be of a shape and length that matches or is 
a near multiple of the wavelength of the transmitted RF signal. 
Finally, this unintentional antenna must not have the typical 
shielding between it and the subject device’s electronics, which if 
present would prevent such a received signal from causing 
interference. In the case of the (OEM System) Wireless transmission, 
which operates between 1,920 mHz and 1,930 mHz, a probe or such piece 
of any medical device measuring at about six (6) inches would match 
the wavelength of the RF carrier, and if not properly shielded from 


the units electronics may indeed conduct the RF energy within. 
However, even in this case, one must consider the power level at the 
so-called antenna receiving the signal. The average output of the 
(OEM Mdl Nr©) handset is approximately 10 mili (m) Watts when in use. 
This very low power, even further reduced by the distance between any 
handset in use and the subject receiving equipment, considered along 
with the high loss of the “antenna”, results in a very low probability 
of actual interference. These facts, along with the standard 
procedures of your engineering department’s efforts to check the 
medical equipment for such shielding and filtering defects, should 
mitigate this potential source. 

4) Potential interference between intentional radiators 
operating in the RF band. Known as either in-band or out-of-band 
interference, these are cases where a transmitter broadcasts a signal 
of significant power at the other device’s receiver to either overload 
the receiving radio or mix with the subject’s transmitted signal to 
cause an interfered signal to be received. In-band interference 

VAMC (City), (State – ZIP Code), Unregulated FCC Equipment Use, Risk 
Assessment and Mitigation, Page Four 

in the Unlicensed PCS band of which the (OEM System) Wireless system 
operates is prevented by the FCC rules requiring our equipment to 
monitor the carrier on which a device intends to transmit on before 
doing so, so as to sense any current use by another device. If such a 
signal is received during monitoring, we move to another carrier and 
try again. This protocol has been demonstrated many times within the 
FCC labs as well as at many industry trade shows where 5 or more 
vendors with U-PCS devices have operated in booths close to each other 
without interference. As for out-of-band interference, because of the 
extremely low power our devices operate with and the very strict outof-
band emission requirements placed upon the U-PCS devices, and the 
additional factor of a wide separation in the operating frequencies of 
our system and the typical radio telemetry equipment used in many 
hospital environments, such interference is very remote and would 
require extremely close proximity of the two devices. 

5) All of our (OEM Mdl Nr©) are FCC listed and has not 
interfered with other traffic within the same band. We expect the FCC 
listed (OEM Mdl Nr©) equipment will perform in the same manner. 

(b) Our Facility will work with (OEM) and VACO’s Spectrum 
Management (005OP2H3) to find a RF band that can be utilized for this 
operation that will allow VA to issue a formal and Official Radio Use 
Permit that will negate the “unregulated equipment use” issues. 

(4) CONNECTION TO IT/CABLE NETWORKS: 

(a) Each item or system that attaches to a VA IT Network 
(telephone or data) must be Department of Commerce’s National 
Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) Underwriters Laboratory (UL) 
60950-1/2; Information Technology Equipment - Safety listed and bears 
UL’s mark. 


 1) Paragraph 1.1.1; Equipment Covered by this Standard 
specifically identifies these systems / networks as one affected 
system. 

2) Paragraph 1.1.2; Additional Requirements further 
identifies this requirement for electomedical applications with 
physical connections to the patient be met. 

(b) This requirement is paramount since the Facility’s 
Telephone PABX and associated system is listed by the National Fire 
Protection Association as Critical Service. Additionally, since it 
carries our Code Blue Radio and Overhead Audio Paging Signals, VA 
elevates it to Life Safety Service. 

(c) Presently the (OEM Mdl Nr©) wireless phones are UL 
Listed but does not have the aforementioned specific UL certification. 
Our Facility is working with (The OEM) in this arena to have them meet 
or exceed this UL requirement. In the meantime we will abide within 
the confines outlined in the attached MOU for insuring an approved IT 
Network / System connection is maintained until the appropriate UL 
certification has been obtained allowing it to be directly connected 
to our telephone system. 

b. The Facility Director after careful review of the attached MOU 
and consultation with the Facility’s CIO, (OEM) engineers, Biomedical 
and NFPA Engineers, ISO, HIPAA / Privacy Officer, Clinical Staff and 
JACHAO Officials has decided this risk-benefit analysis strongly 
favors purchasing replacement (OEM Mdl Nr) phones. 

 

VAMC (City), (State – ZIP Code), Unregulated FCC Equipment Use, Risk 
Assessment and Mitigation, Page Four 

2. Please feel free to contact me concerning the contents of this 
document. 

 

 

 

DIRECTOR’s NAME IN CAPS 

 

cc: Office of General Counsel 

 Office of Telecommunications (05) 

 VA Enterprise Infrastructure Engineering 

 Telecommunications Engineering and Design 

 Office of Cyber Security 

 

Attachment: VACO MOU 

 

- - - E N D - - - 


 


SECTION 28 31 00 
FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section of the specifications includes the furnishing, 
installation, and connection of the fire alarm equipment to form a 
complete coordinated system ready for operation. It shall include, but 
not be limited to, alarm initiating devices, alarm notification 
appliances, control units, fire safety control devices, annunciators, 
power supplies, and wiring as shown on the drawings and specified. The 
fire alarm system shall not be combined with other systems such as 
building automation, energy management, security, etc. 

 

B. Fire alarm systems shall comply with requirements of the most recent VA 
FIRE PROTECTION DESIGN MANUAL and NFPA 72 unless variations to NFPA 72 
are specifically identified within these contract documents by the 
following notation: "variation". The design, system layout, document 
submittal preparation, and supervision of installation and testing 
shall be provided by a technician that is certified NICET level III or 
a registered fire protection engineer. The NICET certified technician 
shall be on site for the supervision and testing of the system. Factory 
engineers from the equipment manufacturer, thoroughly familiar and 
knowledgeable with all equipment utilized, shall provide additional 
technical support at the site as required by the COTR or his authorized 
representative. Installers shall have a minimum of 2 years experience 
installing fire alarm systems. 

 

C. Fire alarm signals: 

1. The first floor is being renovated and the existing fire alarm 
system shall be modified for complete coverage per NFPA 72 for the 
new areas. Existing devices and cables shall be removed and the 
existing Edwards EST fire alarm control panel shall be reused. 
System functions shall match the existing system functions and 
provide a digitized voice evacuation system. 

D. Alarm signals (by device), supervisory signals (by device) and system 
trouble signals (by device not reporting) shall be distinctly 
transmitted to the main fire alarm system control unit located in the 
basement IT Room. 


E. The main fire alarm control unit shall automatically transmit alarm 
signals to a listed central station using a digital alarm communicator 
transmitter in accordance with NFPA 72. 

 

1.2 SCOPE 

A. A fully addressable fire alarm system for the renovated areas as an 
extension of the existing system shall be designed and installed in 
accordance with the specifications and drawings. Device location and 
wiring runs shown on the drawings are for reference only unless 
specifically dimensioned. Actual locations shall be in accordance with 
NFPA 72 and this specification. 

 

B. All existing fire alarm equipment, wiring, devices and sub-systems that 
are not shown to be reused shall be removed. All existing fire alarm 
conduit not reused shall be removed. 

C. Existing fire alarm bells, chimes, door holders, 120VAC duct smoke 
detectors, valve tamper switches and waterflow/pressure switches may be 
reused only as specifically indicated on the drawings and provided the 
equipment: 

1. Meets this specification section 

2. Is UL listed or FM approved 

3. Is compatible with new equipment being installed 

4. Is verified as operable through contractor testing and inspection 

5. Is warranted as new by the contractor. 

D. Existing 120 VAC duct smoke detectors, waterflow/pressure switches, and 
valve tamper switches reused by the Contractor shall be equipped with 
an addressable interface device compatible with the new equipment being 
installed. 

E. Existing reused equipment shall be covered as new equipment under the 
Warranty specified herein. 

F. Basic Performance: 

1. Alarm and trouble signals from each building fire alarm control 
panel shall be digitally encoded by UL listed electronic devices 
onto a multiplexed communication system. 

2. Response time between alarm initiation (contact closure) and 
recording at the main fire alarm control unit (appearance on 
alphanumeric read out) shall not exceed 5 seconds. 


3. The signaling line circuits (SLC) between building fire alarm 
control units shall be wired Style 7 in accordance with NFPA 72. 
Isolation shall be provided so that no more than one building can be 
lost due to a short circuit fault. 

4. Initiating device circuits (IDC) shall be wired Style C in 
accordance with NFPA 72. 

5. Signaling line circuits (SLC) within buildings shall be wired Style 
4 in accordance with NFPA 72. Individual signaling line circuits 
shall be limited to covering 22,500 square feet (2,090 square 
meters) of floor space or 3 floors whichever is less. 

6. Notification appliance circuits (NAC) shall be wired Style Y in 
accordance with NFPA 72. 

1.3 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES. 

 Requirements for procedures for submittals. 

B. Section 07 84 00 - FIRESTOPPING. Requirements for fire proofing wall 
penetrations. 

C. Section 21 13 13 - WET-PIPE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. Requirements for 
sprinkler systems. 

D. Section 28 05 00 – COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND 
SECURITY. Requirements for general requirements that are common to more 
than one section in Division 28. 

E. Section 28 05 13 - CONDUCTORS AND CABLES FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND 
SECURITY. Requirements for conductors and cables. 

F. Section 28 05 26 - GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND 
SECURITY. Requirements for grounding of equipment. 

G. Section 28 05 28.33 - CONDUITS AND BACKBOXES FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND 
SECURITY. Requirements for infrastructure. 

H. Section 28 05 13 - CONDUCTORS AND CABLES FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND 
SECURITY. Requirements for conductors and cables. 

I. Section 28 08 00, COMMISIONING OF ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND SECURITY 
SYSTEMS. Requirements for commissioning - systems readiness checklists, 
and training. 

1.4 SUBMITTALS 

A. General: Submit 5 copies in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP 
DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES, and Section 26 05 11, REQUIREMENTS 
FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS. 

 


B. Drawings: 

1. Prepare drawings using AutoCAD Release 2007 software and include 
all contractor’s information. Layering shall be by VA criteria as 
provided by the Contracting Officer’s Technical Representative 
(COTR). Bid drawing files on AutoCAD will be provided to the 
Contractor at the pre-construction meeting. The contractor shall be 
responsible for verifying all critical dimensions shown on the 
drawings provided by VA. 

 

2. Floor plans: Provide locations of all devices (with device number at 
each addressable device corresponding to control unit programming), 
appliances, panels, equipment, junction/terminal cabinets/boxes, 
risers, electrical power connections, individual circuits and 
raceway routing, system zoning; number, size, and type of raceways 
and conductors in each raceway; conduit fill calculations with cross 
section area percent fill for each type and size of conductor and 
raceway. Only those devices connected and incorporated into the 
final system shall be on these floor plans. Do not show any removed 
devices on the floor plans. Show all interfaces for all fire safety 
functions. 

3. Riser diagrams: Provide, for the entire system, the number, size and 
type of riser raceways and conductors in each riser raceway and 
number of each type device per floor and zone. Show door holder 
interface, elevator control interface, HVAC shutdown interface, fire 
extinguishing system interface, and all other fire safety 
interfaces. Show wiring Styles on the riser diagram for all 
circuits. Provide diagrams both on a per building and campus wide 
basis. 

4. Detailed wiring diagrams: Provide for control panels, modules, power 
supplies, electrical power connections, auxiliary relays and 
annunciators showing termination identifications, size and type 
conductors, circuit boards, LED lamps, indicators, adjustable 
controls, switches, ribbon connectors, wiring harnesses, terminal 
strips and connectors, spare zones/circuits. Diagrams shall be drawn 
to a scale sufficient to show spatial relationships between 
components, enclosures and equipment configuration. 

5. Two weeks prior to final inspection, the Contractor shall deliver to 
the COTR 3 sets of as-built drawings and one set of the as-built 


drawing computer files using AutoCAD 2007 or later. As-built 
drawings (floor plans) shall show all new and/or existing conduit 
used for the fire alarm system. 

C. Manuals: 

1. Submit simultaneously with the shop drawings, companion copies of 
complete maintenance and operating manuals including technical data 
sheets for all items used in the system, power requirements, device 
wiring diagrams, dimensions, and information for ordering 
replacement parts. 

a. Wiring diagrams shall have their terminals identified to 
facilitate installation, operation, expansion and maintenance. 

b. Wiring diagrams shall indicate internal wiring for each item of 
equipment and the interconnections between the items of 
equipment. 

c. Include complete listing of all software used and installation 
and operation instructions including the input/output matrix 
chart. 

d. Provide a clear and concise description of operation that gives, 
in detail, the information required to properly operate, inspect, 
test and maintain the equipment and system. Provide all 
manufacturer's installation limitations including but not limited 
to circuit length limitations. 

e. Complete listing of all digitized voice messages. 

f. Provide standby battery calculations under normal operating and 
alarm modes. Battery calculations shall include the magnets for 
holding the doors open for one minute. 

g. Include information indicating who will provide emergency service 
and perform post contract maintenance. 

h. Provide a replacement parts list with current prices. Include a 
list of recommended spare parts, tools, and instruments for 
testing and maintenance purposes. 

i. A computerized preventive maintenance schedule for all equipment. 
The schedule shall be provided on disk in a computer format 
acceptable to the VAMC and shall describe the protocol for 
preventive maintenance of all equipment. The schedule shall 
include the required times for systematic examination, adjustment 
and cleaning of all equipment. A print out of the schedule shall 


also be provided in the manual. Provide the disk in a pocket 
within the manual. 

j. Furnish manuals in 3 ring loose-leaf binder or manufacturer's 
standard binder. 

k. A print out for all devices proposed on each signaling line 
circuit with spare capacity indicated. 

2. Two weeks prior to final inspection, deliver 4 copies of the final 
updated maintenance and operating manual to the COTR. 

a. The manual shall be updated to include any information 
necessitated by the maintenance and operating manual approval. 

b. Complete "As installed" wiring and schematic diagrams shall be 
included that shows all items of equipment and their 
interconnecting wiring. Show all final terminal identifications. 

c. Complete listing of all programming information, including all 
control events per device including an updated input/output 
matrix. 

d. Certificate of Installation as required by NFPA 72 for each 
building. The certificate shall identify any variations from the 
National Fire Alarm Code. 

e. Certificate from equipment manufacturer assuring compliance with 
all manufacturers installation requirements and satisfactory 
system operation. 

D. Certifications: 

1. Together with the shop drawing submittal, submit the technician's 
NICET level III fire alarm certification as well as certification 
from the control unit manufacturer that the proposed performer of 
contract maintenance is an authorized representative of the major 
equipment manufacturer. Include in the certification the names and 
addresses of the proposed supervisor of installation and the 
proposed performer of contract maintenance. Also include the name 
and title of the manufacturer’s representative who makes the 
certification. 

2. Together with the shop drawing submittal, submit a certification 
from either the control unit manufacturer or the manufacturer of 
each component (e.g., smoke detector) that the components being 
furnished are compatible with the control unit. 


3. Together with the shop drawing submittal, submit a certification 
from the major equipment manufacturer that the wiring and connection 
diagrams meet this specification, UL and NFPA 72 requirements. 

1.5 WARRANTY 

 All work performed and all material and equipment furnished under this 
contract shall be free from defects and shall remain so for a period of 
one year from the date of acceptance of the entire installation by the 
Contracting Officer. 

1.6 GUARANTY PERIOD SERVICES 

A. Complete inspection, testing, maintenance and repair service for the 
fire alarm system shall be provided by a factory trained authorized 
representative of the manufacturer of the major equipment for a period 
of 5 years from the date of acceptance of the entire installation by 
the Contracting Officer. 

B. Contractor shall provide all necessary test equipment, parts and labor 
to perform required inspection, testing, maintenance and repair. 

C. All inspection, testing, maintenance and permanent records required by 
NFPA 72, and recommended by the equipment manufacturer shall be 
provided by the contractor. Work shall include operation of sprinkler 
system alarm and supervisory devices as well as all reused existing 
equipment connected to the fire alarm system. It shall include all 
interfaced equipment including but not limited to elevators, HVAC 
shutdown, and extinguishing systems. 

D. Maintenance and testing shall be performed in accordance with NFPA 72. 
A computerized preventive maintenance schedule shall be provided and 
shall describe the protocol for preventive maintenance of equipment. 
The schedule shall include a systematic examination, adjustment and 
cleaning of all equipment. 

E. Non-included Work: Repair service shall not include the performance of 
any work due to improper use, accidents, or negligence for which the 
contractor is not responsible. 

F. Service and emergency personnel shall report to the Engineering Office 
or their authorized representative upon arrival at the hospital and 
again upon the completion of the required work. A copy of the work 
ticket containing a complete description of the work performed and 
parts replaced shall be provided to the VA COTRor his authorized 
representative. 

 


1.7 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below (including amendments, addenda, 
revisions, supplements and errata) form a part of this specification to 
the extent referenced. The publications are referenced in text by the 
basic designation only and the latest editions of these publications 
shall be applicable. 

B. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): 

NFPA 13 ................Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler 
Systems, 2010 edition 

NFPA 14 ................ Standard for the Installation of Standpipes and 
Hose Systems, 2010 edition 

NFPA 20 ................ Standard for the Installation of Stationary 
Pumps for Fire Protection, 2010 edition 

NFPA 70.................National Electrical Code (NEC), 2010 edition 

NFPA 72.................National Fire Alarm Code, 2010 edition 

NFPA 90A................Standard for the Installation of Air 
Conditioning and Ventilating Systems, 2009 
edition 

NFPA 101................Life Safety Code, 2009 edition 

C. Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL): Fire Protection Equipment 
Directory 

D. Factory Mutual Research Corp (FM): Approval Guide, 2007-2011 

E. American National Standards Institute (ANSI): 

S3.41...................Audible Emergency Evacuation Signal, 1990 
edition, reaffirmed 2008 

F. International Code Council, International Building Code (IBC), 2009 
edition 

PART 2 A- PRODUCTS 

2.1 EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS, GENERAL 

A. All equipment and components shall be new and the manufacturer's 
current model. All equipment shall be tested and listed by Underwriters 
Laboratories, Inc. or Factory Mutual Research Corporation for use as 
part of a fire alarm system. The authorized representative of the 
manufacturer of the major equipment shall certify that the installation 
complies with all manufacturers’ requirements and that satisfactory 
total system operation has been achieved. 


2.2 CONDUIT, BOXES, AND WIRE 

A. Conduit shall be in accordance with Section 28 05 28.33 CONDUIT AND 
BACKBOXES FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND SECURITY and as follows: 

1. All new conduits shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 70. 

2. Conduit fill shall not exceed 40 percent of interior cross sectional 
area. 

3. All new conduits shall be 3/4 inch (19 mm) minimum. 

B. Wire: 

1. Wiring shall be in accordance with NEC article 760, Section 28 05 
13, CONDUCTORS AND CABLES FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND SECURITY, and as 
recommended by the manufacturer of the fire alarm system. All wires 
shall be color coded. Number and size of conductors shall be as 
recommended by the fire alarm system manufacturer, but not less than 
18 AWG for initiating device circuits and 14 AWG for notification 
device circuits. 

2. Addressable circuits and wiring used for the multiplex communication 
loop shall be twisted and shielded unless specifically excepted by 
the fire alarm equipment manufacturer in writing. 

3. Any fire alarm system wiring that extends outside of a building 
shall have additional power surge protection to protect equipment 
from physical damage and false signals due to lightning, voltage and 
current induced transients. Protection devices shall be shown on the 
submittal drawings and shall be UL listed or in accordance with 
written manufacturer's requirements. 

4. All wire or cable used in underground conduits including those in 
concrete shall be listed for wet locations. 

C. Terminal Boxes, Junction Boxes, and Cabinets: 

1. Shall be galvanized steel in accordance with UL requirements. 

2. All boxes shall be sized and installed in accordance with NFPA 70. 

3. covers shall be repainted red in accordance with Section 09 91 00, 
PAINTING and shall be identified with white markings as "FA" for 
junction boxes and as "FIRE ALARM SYSTEM" for cabinets and terminal 
boxes. Lettering shall be a minimum of 3/4 inch (19 mm) high. 

4. Terminal boxes and cabinets shall have a volume 50 percent greater 
than required by the NFPA 70. Minimum sized wire shall be considered 
as 14 AWG for calculation purposes. 

5. Terminal boxes and cabinets shall have identified pressure type 
terminal strips and shall be located at the base of each riser. 


Terminal strips shall be labeled as specified or as approved by the 
COTR. 

2.3 FIRE ALARM CONTROL UNIT 

A. General: 

1. The main FACP, Edwards EST, is existing and located in the basement. 

 

2.4 ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCES 

 

A. Speakers: 

1. Shall operate on either 25 VRMS or 70.7 VRMS with field selectable 
output taps from 0.5 to 2.0W and originally installed at the 1/2 
watt tap. Speakers shall provide a minimum sound output of 80 dBA at 
10 feet (3,000 mm) with the 1/2 watt tap. 

2. Frequency response shall be a minimum of 400 HZ to 4,000 HZ. 

3. Four inches (100 mm) or 8 inches (200 mm) cone type speakers ceiling 
mounted with white colored baffles in areas with suspended ceilings 
and wall mounted in areas without ceilings. 

B. Strobes: 

1. Xenon flash tube type minimum 15 candela in toilet rooms and 75 
candela in all other areas with a flash rate of 1 HZ. Strobes shall 
be synchronized where required by the National Fire Alarm Code (NFPA 
72). 

2. Backplate shall be red with 1/2 inch (13 mm) permanent red letters. 
Lettering to read "Fire", be oriented on the wall or ceiling 
properly, and be visible from all viewing directions. 

3. Each strobe circuit shall have a minimum of 20 percent spare 
capacity. 

4. Strobes may be combined with the audible notification appliances 
specified herein. 

2.5 ALARM INITIATING DEVICES 

A. Manual Fire Alarm Stations: 

1. Shall be non-breakglass, address reporting type. 

2. Station front shall be constructed of a durable material such as 
cast or extruded metal or high impact plastic. Stations shall be 
semi-flush type. 

3. Stations shall be of single action pull down type with suitable 
operating instructions provided on front in raised or depressed 
letters, and clearly labeled "FIRE." 


4. Operating handles shall be constructed of a durable material. On 
operation, the lever shall lock in alarm position and remain so 
until reset. A key shall be required to gain front access for 
resetting, or conducting tests and drills. 

5. Unless otherwise specified, all exposed parts shall be red in color 
and have a smooth, hard, durable finish. 

6.Stations identified as key operated only shall have a single 
standardized lock and key separate from the control equipment 

B. Smoke Detectors: 

1. Smoke detectors shall be photoelectric type and UL listed for use 
with the fire alarm control unit being furnished. 

2. Smoke detectors shall be addressable type complying with applicable 
UL Standards for system type detectors. Smoke detectors shall be 
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and 
NFPA 72. 

3. Detectors shall have an indication lamp to denote an alarm 
condition. Provide remote indicator lamps and identification plates 
where detectors are concealed from view. Locate the remote indicator 
lamps and identification plates flush mounted on walls so they can 
be observed from a normal standing position. 

4. All spot type and duct type detectors installed shall be of the 
photoelectric type. 

5. Photoelectric detectors shall be factory calibrated and readily 
field adjustable. The sensitivity of any photoelectric detector 
shall be factory set at 3.0 plus or minus 0.25 percent obscuration 
per foot. 

6. Detectors shall provide a visual trouble indication if they drift 
out of sensitivity range or fail internal diagnostics. Detectors 
shall also provide visual indication of sensitivity level upon 
testing. Detectors, along with the fire alarm control units shall be 
UL listed for testing the sensitivity of the detectors. 

2.6 SUPERVISORY DEVICES 

A. Duct Smoke Detectors: 

1. Duct smoke detectors shall be provided and connected by way of an 
address reporting interface device. Detectors shall be provided with 
an approved duct housing mounted exterior to the duct, and shall 
have perforated sampling tubes extending across the full width of 


the duct (wall to wall). Detector placement shall be such that there 
is uniform airflow in the cross section of the duct. 

2. Interlocking with fans shall be provided in accordance with NFPA 90A 
and as specified hereinafter under Part 3.2, "TYPICAL OPERATION". 

3. Provide remote indicator lamps, key test stations and identification 
nameplates (e.g. "DUCT SMOKE DETECTOR AHU-X") for all duct 
detectors. Locate key test stations in plain view on walls or 
ceilings so that they can be observed and operated from a normal 
standing position. 

2.7 ADDRESS REPORTING INTERFACE DEVICE 

A. Shall have unique addresses that reports directly to the building fire 
alarm panel. 

B. Shall be configurable to monitor normally open or normally closed 
devices for both alarm and trouble conditions. 

C. Shall have terminal designations clearly differentiating between the 
circuit to which they are reporting from and the device that they are 
monitoring. 

D. Shall be UL listed for fire alarm use and compatibility with the panel 
to which they are connected. 

E. Shall be mounted in weatherproof housings if mounted exterior to a 
building. 

2.8 SMOKE BARRIER DOOR CONTROL 

A. Electromagnetic Door Holders: 

1. New Door Holders shall be standard wall mounted electromagnetic 
type. In locations where doors do not come in contact with the wall 
when in the full open position, an extension post shall be added to 
the door bracket. 

2. Operation shall be by 24 volt DC supplied from a battery located at 
the fire alarm control unit. Door holders shall be coordinated as to 
voltage, ampere drain, and voltage drop with the battery, battery 
charger, wiring and fire alarm system for operation as specified. 

B. A maximum of twelve door holders shall be provided for each circuit. 
Door holders shall be wired to allow releasing doors by smoke zone. 

C. Door holder control circuits shall be electrically supervised. 

D. Smoke detectors shall not be incorporated as an integral part of door 
holders. 


2.9 UTILITY LOCKS AND KEYS: 

A. All key operated test switches, control units, annunciator panels and 
lockable cabinets shall be provided with a single standardized utility 
lock and key. 

B. Key-operated manual fire alarm stations shall have a single 
standardized lock and key separate from the control equipment. 

C. All keys shall be delivered to the COTR. 

2.10 SPARE AND REPLACEMENT PARTS 

 

A. Provide spare and replacement parts as follows: 

1. Manual pull stations - 5 

2. Key operated manual pull stations - 3 

3. Fire alarm strobes - 5 

4. Fire alarm speakers - 5 

5. Smoke detectors - 1 

6. Duct smoke detectors with all appurtenances - 1 

7. Control equipment utility locksets - 1 

8. Control equipment keys - 3 

9. Key operated manual pull station keys – 3 

10. 2.5 oz containers aerosol smoke - 2 

11. Monitor modules - 1 

12. Control modules - 1 

12. Fire alarm SLC cable (same as installed) – 500 feet (152 m) 

B. Keys for key-operated manual pull stations shall be provided 30 days 
prior to actual installation. 

C. Spare and replacement parts shall be in original packaging and 
submitted to the COTR. 

D. Furnish and install a storage cabinet of sufficient size and suitable 
for storing spare equipment. Doors shall include a pad locking device. 
Padlock to be provided by the VA. Location of cabinet to be determined 
by the COTR. 

E. Provide to the VA, all hardware, software, programming tools, license 
and documentation necessary to permanently modify the fire alarm system 
on site. The minimum level of modification includes addition and 
deletion of devices, circuits, zones and changes to system description, 
system operation, and digitized evacuation and instructional messages. 


2.11 INSTRUCTION CHART: 

 Provide typewritten instruction card mounted behind a Lexan plastic or 
glass cover in a stainless steel or aluminum frame with a backplate. 
Install the frame in a conspicuous location observable from each 
control unit where operations are performed. The card shall show those 
steps to be taken by an operator when a signal is received under all 
conditions, normal, alarm, supervisory, and trouble. Provide an 
additional copy with the binder for the input output matrix for the 
sequence of operation. The instructions shall be approved by the COTR 
before being posted. 

 

 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 INSTALLATION: 

A. Installation shall be in accordance with NFPA 70, 72, 90A, and 101 as 
shown on the drawings, and as recommended by the major equipment 
manufacturer. Fire alarm wiring shall be installed in conduit. All 
conduit and wire shall be installed in accordance with, Section 28 05 
13 CONDUCTORS AND CABLES FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND SECURITY, Section 28 
05 26 GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND SECURITY, Section 
28 05 28.33 CONDUIT AND BACKBOXES FOR ELECTRONIC SAFETY AND SECURITY, 
and all penetrations of smoke and fire barriers shall be protected as 
required by Section 07 84 00, FIRESTOPPING. 

B. All conduits, junction boxes, conduit supports and hangers shall be 
concealed in finished areas and may be exposed in unfinished areas. 

C. All new and reused exposed conduits shall be painted in accordance with 
Section 09 91 00, PAINTING to match surrounding finished areas and red 
in unfinished areas. 

 

D. All existing accessible fire alarm conduit not reused shall be removed. 

E. Existing devices that are reused shall be properly mounted and 
installed. Where devices are installed on existing shallow backboxes, 
extension rings of the same material, color and texture of the new fire 
alarm devices shall be used. Mounting surfaces shall be cut and patched 
in accordance with Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, Restoration, 
and be re-painted in accordance with Section 09 91 00, PAINTING as 
necessary to match existing. 


F. All fire detection and alarm system devices, control units and remote 
annunciators shall be flush mounted when located in finished areas and 
may be surface mounted when located in unfinished areas. Exact 
locations are to be approved by the COTR. 

G. Speakers shall be ceiling mounted and fully recessed in areas with 
suspended ceilings. Speakers shall be wall mounted and recessed in 
finished areas without suspended ceilings. Speakers may be surface 
mounted in unfinished areas. 

H. Strobes shall be flush wall mounted with the bottom of the unit located 
80 inches (2,000 mm) above the floor or 6 inches (150 mm) below 
ceiling, whichever is lower. Locate and mount to maintain a minimum 36 
inches (900 mm) clearance from side obstructions. 

I. Manual pull stations shall be institutional type operated by key only 
for psychiatric areas installed not less than 42 inches (1,050 mm) or 
more than 48 inches (1,200 mm) from finished floor to bottom of device 
and within 60 inches (1,500 mm) of a stairway or an exit door. 

L. Connect flow and tamper switches installed under Section 21 13 13, WETPIPE 
SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. 

M. Connect combination closer-holders installed under Section 08 71 00, 
DOOR HARDWARE. 

3.2 TYPICAL OPERATION 

 

A. Activation of any manual pull station, water flow or pressure switch, 
or smoke detector shall cause the following operations to occur: 

1. Operate the emergency voice communication system in Buildings 100. 
For sprinkler protected buildings, flash strobes continuously only 
in the zone of alarm. 2. Continuously sound a temporal pattern 
general alarm and flash all strobes in the building in alarm until 
reset at the local fire alarm control unit in Buildings 100. 

3. Release only the magnetic door holders in the smoke zone on the 
floor from which alarm was initiated after the alert signal. 

4. Transmit a separate alarm signal, via the main fire alarm control 
unit to the fire department. 

5. Unlock the electrically locked exit doors within the zone of alarm. 

 

E. Operation of a smoke detector at a corridor door used for automatic 
closing shall also release only the magnetic door holders on that floor 
in that smoke zone . . 


F. Operation of duct smoke detectors shall cause a system supervisory 
condition and shut down the ventilation system and close the associated 
smoke dampers as appropriate. 

G. Operation of any sprinkler or standpipe system valve supervisory switch 
shall cause a system supervisory condition. 

H. Alarm verification shall not be used for smoke detectors installed for 
the purpose of early warning. 

3.3 TESTS 

A. Provide the service of a NICET level III, competent, factory-trained 
engineer or technician authorized by the manufacturer of the fire alarm 
equipment to technically supervise and participate during all of the 
adjustments and tests for the system. Make all adjustments and tests in 
the presence of the COTR. 

B. When the systems have been completed and prior to the scheduling of the 
final inspection, furnish testing equipment and perform the following 
tests in the presence of the COTR. When any defects are detected, make 
repairs or install replacement components, and repeat the tests until 
such time that the complete fire alarm systems meets all contract 
requirements. After the system has passed the initial test and been 
approved by the COTR, the contractor may request a final inspection. 

1. Before energizing the cables and wires, check for correct 
connections and test for short circuits, ground faults, continuity, 
and insulation. 

2. Test the insulation on all installed cable and wiring by standard 
methods as recommended by the equipment manufacturer. 

3. Run water through all flow switches. Check time delay on water flow 
switches. Submit a report listing all water flow switch operations 
and their retard time in seconds. 

4. Open each alarm initiating and notification circuit to see if 
trouble signal actuates. 

5. Ground each alarm initiation and notification circuit and verify 
response of trouble signals. 

3.4 FINAL INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE 

A. Prior to final acceptance a minimum 30 day "burn-in" period shall be 
provided. The purpose shall be to allow equipment to stabilize and 
potential installation and software problems and equipment malfunctions 
to be identified and corrected. During this diagnostic period, all 
system operations and malfunctions shall be recorded. Final acceptance 


will be made upon successful completion of the "burn-in" period and 
where the last 14 days is without a system or equipment malfunction. 

B. At the final inspection a factory trained representative of the 
manufacturer of the major equipment shall repeat the tests in Article 
3.3 TESTS and those required by NFPA 72. In addition the representative 
shall demonstrate that the systems function properly in every respect. 
The demonstration shall be made in the presence of a VA representative. 

3.5 INSTRUCTION 

A. The manufacturer's authorized representative shall provide instruction 
and training to the VA as follows: 

1. Six 1-hour sessions to engineering staff, security police and 
central attendant personnel for simple operation of the system. Two 
sessions at the start of installation, 2 sessions at the completion 
of installation and 2 sessions 3 months after the completion of 
installation. 

2. Four 2-hour sessions to engineering staff for detailed operation of 
the system. Two sessions at the completion of installation and 2 
sessions 3 months after the completion of installation. 

3. Three 8-hour sessions to electrical technicians for maintaining, 
programming, modifying, and repairing the system at the completion 
of installation and one 8-hour refresher session 3 months after the 
completion of installation. 

B. The Contractor and/or the Systems Manufacturer's representative shall 
provide a typewritten "Sequence of Operation" including a trouble 
shooting guide of the entire system for submittal to the VA. The 
sequence of operation will be shown for each input in the system in a 
matrix format and provided in a loose leaf binder. When reading the 
sequence of operation, the reader will be able to quickly and easily 
determine what output will occur upon activation of any input in the 
system. The INPUT/OUTPUT matrix format shall be as shown in Appendix A 
to NFPA 72. 

C. Furnish the services of a competent instructor for instructing 
personnel in the programming requirements necessary for system 
expansion. Such programming shall include addition or deletion of 
devices, zones, indicating circuits and printer/display text. 

PART 4 - SCHEDULES 

4.1 SMOKE ZONE DESCRIPTIONS: 

 


4.2 DIGITIZED VOICE MESSAGES: 

A. Digitized voice messages shall be provided for each smoke zone of 
Buildings 100 3 West. The messages shall be arranged with a 3 second 
alert tone, a "Code Red" message and a description of the fire alarm 
area (building number, floor, level and smoke zone). A sample of such a 
message is as follows: 

Alert Tone 

Code Red 

Building 100, Third Floor, West Wing 

4.3 LOCATION OF VOICE MESSAGES: 

 Upon receipt of an alarm signal from the building fire alarm system, 
the voice communication system shall automatically transmit a 3 second 
tone alert and a pre-recorded fire alarm message throughout the floor 
in alarm, the floor above and the floor below the building . 

 - - END - - 


SECTION 31 20 00 
EARTHWORK 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION OF WORK: 

A. This section specifies the requirements for furnishing all equipment, 
materials, labor, tools, and techniques for earthwork including, but not 
limited to, the following: 

1. Site preparation. 

2. Excavation. 

3. Filling and backfilling. 

4. Grading. 

5. Soil Disposal. 

6. Clean Up. 

1.2 DEFINITIONS: 

A. Unsuitable Materials: 

1. Fills: Topsoil; frozen materials; construction materials and 
materials subject to decomposition; clods of clay and stones larger 
than 3 inches; organic material, including silts, which are unstable; 
and inorganic materials, including silts, too wet to be stable and 
any material with a liquid limit and plasticity index exceeding 40 
and 15 respectively. Unsatisfactory soils also include satisfactory 
soils not maintained within 2 percent of optimum moisture content at 
time of compaction, as defined by ASTM D1557. 

2. Existing Subgrade (Except Footing Subgrade): Same materials as 
1.2.A.1, that are not capable of direct support of slabs, pavement, 
and similar items with possible exception of improvement by 
compaction, proof-rolling, or similar methods. 

3. Existing Subgrade (Footings Only): Same as paragraph 1, but no fill 
or backfill. If materials differ from reference borings and design 
requirements, excavate to acceptable strata subject to Resident 
Engineer's approval. 

B. Building Earthwork: Earthwork operations required in area enclosed by a 
line located 5 feet outside of principal building perimeter. It also 
includes earthwork required for auxiliary structures and buildings. 

C. Trench Earthwork: Trenchwork required for utility lines. 

D. Site Earthwork: Earthwork operations required in area outside of a line 
located 5 feet outside of principal building perimeter and within new 
construction area with exceptions noted above. 

E. Degree of compaction: Degree of compaction is expressed as a percentage 
of maximum density obtained by laboratory test procedure. This 


percentage of maximum density is obtained through use of data provided 
from results of field test procedures presented in ASTM D1556, ASTM 
D2167, and ASTM D6938. 

F. Fill: Satisfactory soil materials used to raise existing grades. In the 
Construction Documents, the term “fill” means fill or backfill as 
appropriate. 

G. Backfill: Soil materials or controlled low strength material used to 
fill an excavation. 

H. Unauthorized excavation: Removal of materials beyond indicated sub-grade 
elevations or indicated lines and dimensions without written 
authorization by the Resident Engineer. No payment will be made for 
unauthorized excavation or remedial work required to correct 
unauthorized excavation. 

I. Authorized additional excavation: Removal of additional material 
authorized by the Resident Engineer based on the determination by the 
Government’s soils testing agency that unsuitable bearing materials are 
encountered at required sub-grade elevations. Removal of unsuitable 
material and its replacement as directed will be paid on basis of 
Conditions of the Contract relative to changes in work. 

J. Subgrade: The undisturbed earth or the compacted soil layer immediately 
below granular base-course, drainage fill, or topsoil materials. 

K. Structure: Buildings, foundations, slabs, curbs, mechanical and 
electrical appurtenances, or other man-made stationary features 
constructed above or below the ground surface. 

L. Borrow: Satisfactory soil imported from off-site for use as fill or 
backfill. 

M. Drainage course: Layer supporting slab-on-grade used to minimize 
capillary flow of pore water. 

N. Bedding course: Layer placed over the excavated sub-grade in a trench 
before laying pipe. Bedding course shall extend up to the springline of 
the pipe. 

O. Utilities include on-site underground pipes, conduits, ducts, and cables 
as well as underground services within buildings. 

P. Debris: Debris includes all materials located within the designated work 
area not covered in the other definitions and shall include but not be 
limited to items like vehicles, equipment, appliances, building 
materials or remains thereof, tires, any solid or liquid chemicals or 
products stored or found in containers or spilled on the ground. 

Q. Contaminated soils: Soil that contains contaminates as defined and 
determined by the Resident Engineer or the Government’s testing agency. 


1.3 RELATED WORK: 

A. Materials testing and inspection during construction: Section 01 45 29, 
TESTING LABORATORY SERVICES. 

B. Safety requirements: Section 00 72 00, GENERAL CONDITIONS, Article, 
ACCIDENT PREVENTION. 

C. Protection of existing utilities, fire protection services, existing 
equipment, roads, and pavements: Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 

D. Subsurface Investigation: Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, 
Article, PHYSICAL DATA. 

E. Erosion Control: Section 01 57 19, TEMPORARY ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS. 

F. Site preparation: Section 02 41 00, DEMOLITION. 

G. Paving sub-grade requirements: Section 32 12 16, ASPHALT PAVING. 

1.4 CLASSIFICATION OF EXCAVATION: 

A. Unclassified Excavation: Removal and disposal of pavements and other 
man-made obstructions visible on surface; utilities, and other items 
including underground structures indicated to be demolished and removed; 
together with any type of materials regardless of character of material 
and obstructions encountered. 

1.5 SUBMITTALS: 

A. Submit in accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, 
AND SAMPLES. 

B. Furnish to Resident Engineer: 

1. Contactor shall furnish resumes with all personnel involved in the 
project including Project Manager, Superintendent, and on-site 
Engineer. Project Manager and Superintendent should have at least 3 
years of experience on projects of similar size. 

2. Soil samples. 

a. Classification in accordance with ASTM D2487 for each on-site or 
borrow soil material proposed for fill, backfill, engineered fill, 
or structural fill. 

b. Laboratory compaction curve in accordance with ASTM D1557 for each 
on site or borrow soil material proposed for fill, backfill, 
engineered fill, or structural fill. 

c. Test reports for compliance with ASTM D2940 requirements for 
subbase material. 

d. Pre-excavation photographs and videotape in the vicinity of the 
existing structures to document existing site features, including 
surface finishes, cracks, or other structural blemishes that might 
be misconstrued as damage caused by earthwork operations. 


3. Contractor shall submit proposed source of borrow material, 
advance notice on the opening of excavation, and advance notice on 
shoulder construction for rigid pavements. 

 1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS: 

A. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to extent 
referenced. Publications are referenced in text by basic designation 
only. 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

C33-03..................Concrete Aggregate 

D448-08.................Standard Classification for Sizes of Aggregate 
for Road and Bridge Construction 

D1140-00................Amount of Material in Soils Finer than the No. 
200 (75-micrometer) Sieve 

D1556-07................Standard Test Method for Density and Unit Weight 
of Soil in Place by the Sand Cone Method 

D1557-09................Standard Test Methods for Laboratory Compaction 
Characteristics of Soil Using Modified Effort 
(56,000 ft-lbf/ft3 (2700 kN m/m3)) 

D2167-08................Standard Test Method for Density and Unit Weight 
of Soil in Place by the Rubber Balloon Method 

D2487-11................Standard Classification of Soils for Engineering 
Purposes (Unified Soil Classification System) 

D2940-09................Standard Specifications for Graded Aggregate 
Material for Bases or Subbases for Highways or 
Airports 

D6938-10................Standard Test Method for In-Place Density and 
Water Content of Soil and Soil-Aggregate by 
Nuclear Methods (Shallow Depth 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 MATERIALS: 

A. General: Provide borrow soil material when sufficient satisfactory soil 
materials are not available from excavations. 

B. Fill: Naturally or artificially graded mixture of compliance with ASTM 
D2487 Soil Classification Groups GW, GC, GP, GM, SW, SP, SM, SC, and CL, 
or any combination of these groups, or as approved by the Engineer or 
material with at least 90 percent passing a 1 1/2-inch sieve and not 
more than 12 percent passing a No. 200 sieve, per ASTM D2940; Material 
approved from on site or off site sources having a minimum dry density 
of 110 pcf, a maximum Plasticity Index of 15, and a maximum Liquid Limit 
of 40. 


C. Bedding: Naturally or artificially graded mixture of natural or crushed 
gravel, crushed stone, and natural or crushed sand; ASTM D2940; except 
with 100 percent passing a 1 inch sieve and not more than 8 percent 
passing a No. 200 sieve. 

D. Drainage Fill: Washed, narrowly graded mixture of crushed stone, or 
crushed or uncrushed gravel; ASTM D448; coarse-aggregate grading Size 
57; with 100 percent passing a 1 1/2-inch sieve and 0 to 5 percent 
passing a No. 8 sieve. 

E. Granular Fill: 

1. Bedding for sanitary and storm sewer pipe, crushed stone or gravel 
graded from 1/2 inch to No 4, per ASTM D2940. 

F. Aggregate Base Course: Conform to Arkansas Highway and Transportation 
Department’s Standard Specification for Class 7 aggregate base course. 
Only materials and workmanship provisions shall apply. 

G. Requirements for Offsite Soils: Offsite soils brought in for use as 
backfill shall be tested for TPH, BTEX and full TCLP including 
ignitability, corrosivity and reactivity. Backfill shall contain less 
than 100 parts per million (ppm) of total hydrocarbons (TPH) and less 
than 10 ppm of the sum of Benzene, Toleune, Ethyl Benzene, and Xylene 
(BTEX) and shall not fail the TCLP test. TPH concentrations shall be 
determined by using EPA 600/4-79/020 Method 418.1. BTEX concentrations 
shall be determined by using EPA SW-846.3-3a Method 5030/8020. TCLP 
shall be performed in accordance with EPA SW-846.3-3a Method 1311. 
Provide Borrow Site Testing for TPH, BTEX and TCLP from a composite 
sample of material from the borrow site, with at least one test from 
each borrow site. 

H. Buried Warning and Identification Tape: Polyethylene plastic and 
metallic core or metallic-faced, acid- and alkali-resistant polyethylene 
plastic warning tape manufactured specifically for warning and 
identification of buried utility lines. Provide tape on rolls, 3 inch 
minimum width, color coded as specific below for the intended utility 
with warning and identification imprinted in bold black letters 
continuously over the entire tape length. Warning and identification to 
read, “CAUTION, BURIED (intended service) LINE BELOW” or similar 
wording. Color and printing shall be permanent, Unaffected by moisture 
or soil. Warning tape color codes: 

 

 Red: Electric 

 Yellow: Gas, Oil, Dangerous Materials 

 Orange: Telephone and Other Communications 

 Blue: Water Systems 


 Green: Sewer Systems 

I. Warning Tape for Metallic Piping: Acid and alkali-resistant 
polyethylene plastic tape conforming to the width, color, and printing 
requirements specified above. Minimum thickness of tape shall be 0.003 
inch. Tape shall have a minimum strength of 1500 psi lengthwise, and 
1250 psi crosswise, with a maximum 350 percent elongation. 

J. Detectable Warning Tape for Non-Metallic Piping: Polyethylene plastic 
tape conforming to the width, color, and printing requirements specified 
above. Minimum thickness of the tape shall be 0.004 inch. Tape shall 
have a minimum strength of 1500 psi lengthwise and 1250 psi crosswise. 
Tape shall be manufactured with integral wires, foil backing, or other 
means of enabling detection by a metal detector when tape is buried up 
to 3 feet deep. Encase metallic element of the tape in a protective 
jacket or provide with other means of corrosion protection. 

K. Detection Wire For Non-Metallic Piping: Detection wire shall be 
Insulated single strand, solid copper with a minimum of 12 AWG. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 SITE PREPARATION: 

A. Clearing: Clear within limits of earthwork operations as shown. Work 
includes removal of trees, shrubs, fences, foundations, incidental 
structures, paving, debris, trash, and other obstructions. Remove 
materials from Medical Center. 

B. Grubbing: Remove stumps and roots 3 inch and larger diameter. 
Undisturbed sound stumps, roots up to 3 inch diameter, and nonperishable 
solid objects a minimum of 3 feet below subgrade or finished embankment 
may be left. C. Trees and Shrubs: Trees and shrubs, not shown for 
removal, may be removed from areas within 15 feet of new construction 
and 7.5 feet of utility lines when removal is approved in advance by 
Resident Engineer. Remove materials from Medical Center. Box, and 
otherwise protect from damage, existing trees and shrubs which are not 
shown to be removed in construction area. Immediately repair damage to 
existing trees and shrubs by trimming, cleaning and painting damaged 
areas, including roots, in accordance with standard industry 
horticultural practice for the geographic area and plant species. Do not 
store building materials closer to trees and shrubs, that are to remain, 
than farthest extension of their limbs. 

C. Stripping Topsoil: Strip topsoil from within limits of earthwork 
operations as specified. Topsoil shall be a fertile, friable, natural 
topsoil of loamy character and characteristic of locality. Topsoil shall 
be capable of growing healthy horticultural crops of grasses. Stockpile 
topsoil and protect as directed by Resident Engineer. Eliminate foreign 


materials, such as weeds, roots, stones, subsoil, frozen clods, and 
similar foreign materials larger than 1/2 cubic foot in volume, from 
soil as it is stockpiled. Retain topsoil on station. Remove foreign 
materials larger than 2 inches in any dimension from topsoil used in 
final grading. Topsoil work, such as stripping, stockpiling, and similar 
topsoil work shall not, under any circumstances, be carried out when 
soil is wet so that the composition of the soil will be destroyed. 

D. Concrete Slabs and Paving: Score deeply or saw cut to insure a neat, 
straight cut, sections of existing concrete slabs and paving to be 
removed where excavation or trenching occurs. Extend pavement section to 
be removed a minimum of 12 inches on each side of widest part of trench 
excavation and insure final score lines are approximately parallel 
unless otherwise indicated. Remove material from Medical Center. 

E. Lines and Grades: Registered Professional Land Surveyor or Registered 
Civil Engineer, specified in Section 01 00 00, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, 
shall establish lines and grades. 

1. Grades shall conform to elevations indicated on plans within the 
tolerances herein specified. Generally grades shall be established to 
provide a smooth surface, free from irregular surface changes. 
Grading shall comply with compaction requirements and grade cross 
sections, lines, and elevations indicated. Where spot grades are 
indicated the grade shall be established based on interpolation of 
the elevations between the spot grades while maintaining appropriate 
transition at structures and paving and uninterrupted drainage flow 
into inlets. 

2. Proposed spot elevations and contour lines have been developed 
utilizing the existing conditions survey and developed contour lines 
and may be approximate. Contractor is responsible to notify Resident 
Engineer of any differences between existing elevations shown on 
plans and those encountered on site by Surveyor/Engineer described 
above. Notify Resident Engineer of any differences between existing 
or constructed grades, as compared to those shown on the plans. 

3. Subsequent to establishment of lines and grades, Contractor will be 
responsible for any additional cut and/or fill required to ensure 
that site is graded to conform to elevations indicated on plans. 

4. Finish grading is specified in Section 32 90 00, PLANTING. 

F. Disposal: All materials removed from the property shall be disposed of 
at a legally approved site, for the specific materials, and all removals 
shall be in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local 
regulations. No burning of materials is permitted onsite. 


3.2 EXCAVATION: 

A. Shoring, Sheeting and Bracing: Shore, brace, or slope, its angle of 
repose or to an angle considered acceptable by the Resident Engineer, 
banks of excavations to protect workmen, banks, adjacent paving, 
structures, and utilities. 

1. Design of the temporary support of excavation system is the 
responsibility of the Contractor. The Contractor shall submit a 
Shoring and Sheeting plan for approval 15 days prior to starting 
work. Submit drawings and calculations, certified by a registered 
professional engineer, describing the methods for shoring and 
sheeting of excavations. Shoring, including sheet piling, shall be 
furnished and installed as necessary to protect workmen, banks, 
adjacent paving, structures, and utilities. Shoring, bracing, and 
sheeting shall be removed as excavations are backfilled, in a manner 
to prevent caving. 

2. Construction of the support of excavation system shall not interfere 
with the permanent structure and may begin only after a review by the 
Resident Engineer. 

3. Extend shoring and bracing to a minimum of 5 feet below the bottom of 
excavation. Shore excavations that are carried below elevations of 
adjacent existing foundations. 

4. If bearing material of any foundation is disturbed by excavating, 
improper shoring or removal of existing or temporary shoring, placing 
of backfill, and similar operations, the Contractor shall provide a 
concrete fill support under disturbed foundations, as directed by 
Resident Engineer, at no additional cost to the Government. Do not 
remove shoring until permanent work in excavation has been inspected 
and approved by Resident Engineer. 

5. The Contractor is required to hire a Professional Geotechnical 
Engineer to provide inspection of excavations and soil/groundwater 
conditions throughout construction. The Geotechnical Engineer shall 
be responsible for performing pre-construction and periodic site 
visits throughout construction to assess site conditions. The 
Geotechnical Engineer shall update the excavation, sheeting and 
dewatering plans as construction progresses to reflect changing 
conditions and shall submit an updated plan if necessary. A written 
report shall be submitted, at least monthly, informing the Contractor 
and Resident Engineer of the status of the plan and an accounting of 
the Contractor's adherence to the plan addressing any present or 
potential problems. The Geotechnical Engineer shall be available to 


meet with the Resident Engineer at any time throughout the contract 
duration. 

B. Excavation Drainage: Operate pumping equipment, and/or provide other 
materials, means and equipment as required to keep excavation free of 
water and subgrade dry, firm, and undisturbed until approval of 
permanent work has been received from Resident Engineer. Approval by the 
Resident Engineer is also required before placement of the permanent 
work on all subgrades. Groundwater flowing toward or into excavations 
shall be controlled to prevent sloughing of excavation slopes and walls, 
boils, uplift and heave in the excavation and to eliminate interference 
with orderly progress of construction. French drains, sumps, ditches or 
trenches will not be permitted within 3 feet of the foundation of any 
structure, except with specific written approval, and after specific 
contractual provisions for restoration of the foundation area have been 
made. Control measures shall be taken by the time the excavation 
reaches the water level in order to maintain the integrity of the in 
situ material. While the excavation is open, the water level shall be 
maintained continuously, at least 2 feet below the working level. 
Operate dewatering system continuously until construction work below 
existing water levels is complete. Submit performance records weekly 

C. Subgrade Protection: Protect subgrades from softening, undermining, 
washout, or damage by rain or water accumulation. Reroute surface water 
runoff from excavated areas and not allow water to accumulate in 
excavations. Do not use excavated trenches as temporary drainage 
ditches. When subgrade for foundations has been disturbed by water, 
remove disturbed material to firm undisturbed material after water is 
brought under control. Replace disturbed subgrade in trenches with 
concrete or material approved by the Resident Engineer. 

D. Blasting: Blasting will not be permitted. 

E. Proof-rolling: 

1. After rough grade has been established in cut areas and prior to 
placement of fill in fill areas under building and pavements, 
proofroll exposed subgrade with a fully loaded dump truck to check 
for pockets of soft material. 

2. Proof rolling shall be done on an exposed subgrade free of surface 
water (wet conditions resulting from rainfall) which would promote 
degradation of an otherwise acceptable subgrade. After stripping, 
proof roll the existing subgrade with six passes of a 15 ton, 
pneumatic-tired roller. Operate the roller in a systematic manner to 
ensure the number of passes over all areas, and at speeds between 2 
1/2 to 3 1/2 mph. When proof rolling, one-half of the passes made 


with the roller shall be in a direction perpendicular to the other 
passes. Notify the Resident Engineer a minimum of 3 days prior to 
proof rolling. Proof rolling shall be performed in the presence of 
the Resident Engineer. Rutting or pumping of material shall be 
undercut as directed by the Resident Engineer. Bids shall be based 
on replacing approximately 300 square yards, with an average depth of 
1-foot at various locations. Maintain subgrade until succeeding 
operation has been accomplished. 

F. Building Earthwork: 

1. Excavation shall be accomplished as required by drawings and 
specifications. 

2. Excavate foundation excavations to solid undisturbed subgrade. 

3. Remove loose or soft materials to a solid bottom. 

4. Fill excess cut under footings or foundations with 3000 psi concrete 
poured separately from the footings. 

5. Do not tamp earth for backfilling in footing bottoms, except as 
specified. 

6. Slope grades to direct water away from excavations and to prevent 
ponding. 

7. Capillary water barrier (drainage fill) under concrete floor and 
area-way slabs on grade shall be placed directly on the subgrade and 
shall be compacted with a minimum of two passes of a hand-operated 
plate-type vibratory compactor. 

8. Ensure that footing subgrades have been inspected and approved by the 
Resident Engineer prior to concrete placement. 

G. Trench Earthwork: 

1. Utility trenches (except sanitary and storm sewer): 

a. Excavate to a width as necessary for sheeting and bracing and 
proper performance of the work. 

b. Grade bottom of trenches with bell holes scooped out to provide a 
uniform bearing. 

c. Support piping on 6-inches of bedding, unless shown otherwise. 
Unstable material removed from the bottom of the trench or 
excavation shall be replaced with select granular material placed 
in layers not exceeding 6 inches loose thickness. 

d. Length of open trench in advance of piping laying shall not be 
greater than is authorized by Resident Engineer. 

e. Provide buried utility lines with utility identification tape. 
Bury tape 12 inches below finished grade; under pavements and 
slabs, bury tape 6 inches below top of subgrade 


f. Bury detection wire directly above non-metallic piping at a 
distance not to exceed 12 inches above the top of pipe. The wire 
shall extend continuously and unbroken, from manhole to manhole. 
The ends of the wire shall terminate inside the manholes at each 
end of the pipe, with a minimum of 3 feet of wire, coiled, 
remaining accessible in each manhole. The wire shall remain 
insulated over it's entire length. The wire shall enter manholes 
between the top of the corbel and the frame, and extend up through 
the chimney seal between the frame and the chimney seal. 

g. Bedding shall be of the thickness shown. Initial bedding material 
shall be placed and compacted with approved tampers to a height of 
at least one foot above the utility pipe or conduit. The backfill 
shall be brought up evenly on both sides of the pipe for the full 
length of the pipe. Care shall be taken to ensure thorough 
compaction of the fill under the haunches of the pipe. 

2. Sanitary and storm sewer trenches: 

a. Trench width below a point 6 inches above top of pipe shall be 24 
inches maximum for pipe up to and including 12 inches diameter, 
and four-thirds diameter of pipe plus 8 inches) for pipe larger 
than 12 inches. Width of trench above that level shall be as 
necessary for sheeting and bracing and proper performance of the 
work. 

1) Bed bottom quadrant of pipe on 6-inch min. of granular fill. 
Unstable material removed from the bottom of the trench or 
excavation shall be replaced with select granular material 
placed in layers not exceeding 6 inches loose thickness. Bell 
holes shall be no larger than necessary for jointing. 

2) Granular Fill: Depth of fill shall be a minimum of 6 inches 
below pipe to 12 inches above top of pipe. Place and tamp fill 
material by hand. 

b. Place and compact as specified remainder of backfill using 
acceptable excavated materials. Do not use unsuitable materials. 

c. Provide buried utility lines with utility identification tape. 
Bury tape 12 inches below finished grade; under pavements and 
slabs, bury tape 6 inches below top of subgrade. 

d. Bury detection wire directly above non-metallic piping at a 
distance not to exceed 12 inches above the top of pipe. The wire 
shall extend continuously and unbroken, from manhole to manhole. 
The ends of the wire shall terminate inside the manholes at each 
end of the pipe, with a minimum of 3 feet of wire, coiled, 
remaining accessible in each manhole. The wire shall remain 


insulated over it's entire length. The wire shall enter manholes 
between the top of the corbel and the frame, and extend up through 
the chimney seal between the frame and the chimney seal. 

H. Site Earthwork: Earth excavation includes excavating pavements and 
obstructions visible on surface; underground structures, utilities, and 
other items indicated to be removed; together with soil, boulders, and 
other materials not classified as unauthorized excavation. Excavation 
shall be accomplished as required by drawings and specifications. 
Excavate to indicated elevations and dimensions within a tolerance of 
plus or minus 1 inch. Extend excavations a sufficient distance from 
structures for placing and removing concrete formwork, for installing 
services and other construction, complying with OSHA requirements, and 
for inspections. Remove subgrade materials that are determined by 
Resident Engineer as unsuitable, and replace with acceptable material. 
If there is a question as to whether material is unsuitable or not, the 
contractor shall obtain samples of the material, under the direction of 
the Resident Engineer, and the materials shall be examined by an 
independent testing laboratory for soil classification to determine 
whether it is unsuitable or not. When unsuitable material is encountered 
and removed, contract price and time will be adjusted in accordance with 
Articles, DIFFERING SITE CONDITIONS, CHANGES and CHANGES-SUPPLEMENT of 
the GENERAL CONDITIONS as applicable. Adjustments to be based on volume 
in cut section only. 

1. Site Grading: 

a. Provide a smooth transition between adjacent existing grades and 
new grades. 

b. Cut out soft spots, fill low spots, and trim high spots to comply 
with required surface tolerances. 

c. Slope grades to direct water away from buildings and to prevent 
ponds from forming where not designed. Finish subgrades to 
required elevations within the following tolerances: 

1) Lawn or Unpaved Areas: Plus or minus 1 inch. 

2) Walks: Plus or minus 1 inch. 

3) Pavements: Plus or minus 1/2 inch. 

d. Grading Inside Building Lines: Finish subgrade to a tolerance of 
1/2 inch when tested with a 10 foot straightedge. 

3.3 FILLING AND BACKFILLING: 

A. General: Do not fill or backfill until all debris, water, unsatisfactory 
soil materials, obstructions, and deleterious materials have been 
removed from excavation. For fill and backfill, use excavated materials 
and borrow meeting the criteria specified herein, as applicable. Borrow 


will be supplied at no additional cost to the Government. Do not use 
unsuitable excavated materials. Do not backfill until foundation walls 
have been completed above grade and adequately braced, waterproofing or 
dampproofing applied, foundation drainage, and pipes coming in contact 
with backfill have been installed and work inspected and approved by 
Resident Engineer. 

B. Placing: Place materials in horizontal layers not exceeding 8 inches in 
loose depth for material compacted by heavy compaction equipment, and 
not more than 4 inches in loose depth for material compacted by handoperated 
tampers and then compacted. Place backfill and fill materials 
evenly on all sides of structures to required elevations, and uniformly 
along the full length of each structure. Place no material on surfaces 
that are muddy, frozen, or contain frost. 

C. Compaction: Compact with approved tamping rollers, sheepsfoot rollers, 
pneumatic tired rollers, steel wheeled rollers, vibrator compactors, or 
other approved equipment (hand or mechanized) well suited to soil being 
compacted. Do not operate mechanized vibratory compaction equipment 
within 10 feet of new or existing building walls without prior approval 
of Resident Engineer. Moisten or aerate material as necessary to provide 
moisture content that will readily facilitate obtaining specified 
compaction with equipment used. Backfill adjacent to any and all types 
of structures shall be placed and compacted to at least 95 percent 
laboratory maximum density. Compact soil to not less than the following 
percentages of maximum dry density, according to ASTM D1557 as specified 
below: 

1. Fills, Embankments, and Backfill 

a. Under proposed structures, building slabs, steps, and paved areas, 
scarify and recompact top 8 inches of existing subgrade and each 
layer of backfill or fill material in accordance with ASTM D1557 
to 95 percent. 

b. Curbs, curbs and gutters, ASTM D1557 to 95 percent. 

c. Under Sidewalks, scarify and recompact top 6 inches below finished 
subgrade and compact each layer of backfill or fill material in 
accordance with ASTM D1557 to 95 percent. 

d. Landscaped areas, top 16 inches, ASTM D1557 to 85 percent. 

e. Landscaped areas, below 16 inches of finished grade, ASTM D1557 
to 90 percent. 

2. Natural Ground (Cut or Existing) 

a. Under building slabs, steps and paved areas, top 6 inches, ASTM 
D1557 to 95 percent. 

b. Curbs, curbs and gutters, top 6 inches, ASTM D1557 to 95 percent. 


c. Under sidewalks, top 6 inches, ASTM D1557 to 95 percent. 

3. Aggregate Base Course: Compact to 98% maximum laboratory density per 
AHTD requirements. 

D. Borrow Material: Borrow material shall be selected to meet the 
requirements and conditions of the particular fill or embankment for 
which it is to be used. Borrow material shall be obtained from approved 
private sources. Unless otherwise provided in the contract, the 
Contractor shall obtain from the owners the right to procure material, 
pay royalties and other charges involved, and bear the expense of 
developing the sources, including rights-of-way for hauling. 

E. Opening and Drainage of Excavation and Borrow Pits: The Contractor shall 
ensure that excavation of any area, operation of borrow pits, or dumping 
of spoil material results in minimum detrimental effects on natural 
environmental conditions. 

3.4 GRADING: 

A. General: Uniformly grade the areas within the limits of this section, 
including adjacent transition areas. Smooth the finished surface within 
specified tolerance. Provide uniform levels or slopes between points 
where elevations are indicated, or between such points and existing 
finished grades. Provide a smooth transition between abrupt changes in 
slope. 

B. Cut rough or sloping rock to level beds for foundations. In pipe spaces 
or other unfinished areas, fill low spots and level off with bedding. 

C. Slope backfill outside building away from building walls for a minimum 
distance of 6 feet. 

D. Place aggregate base course under concrete slabs on grade, tamped, and 
leveled. Thickness of fill shall be 6 inches unless otherwise shown. 

E. Finish subgrade in a condition acceptable to Resident Engineer at least 
one day in advance of paving operations. Maintain finished subgrade in a 
smooth and compacted condition until succeeding operation has been 
accomplished. Scarify, compact, and grade subgrade prior to further 
construction when approved compacted subgrade is disturbed by 
Contractor's subsequent operations or adverse weather. 

F. Grading for Paved Areas: Provide final grades for both subgrade and base 
course to +/- 0.25 inches of indicated grades. 

3.5 DISPOSAL OF UNSUITABLE AND EXCESS EXCAVATED MATERIAL: 

A. Disposal: Remove surplus satisfactory soil and waste material, including 
unsatisfactory soil, trash, and debris, and legally dispose of it off 
Medical Center property. 

B. Remove from site and dispose of any excess excavated materials after all 
fill and backfill operations have been completed. 


C. Segregate all excavated contaminated soil designated by the Resident 
Engineer from all other excavated soils, and stockpile on site on two 6 
mil polyethylene sheets with a polyethylene cover. A designated area 
shall be selected for this purpose. Dispose of excavated contaminated 
material in accordance with State and Local requirements. 

3.6 CLEAN UP: 

A. Upon completion of earthwork operations, clean areas within contract 
limits, remove tools, and equipment. Provide site clear, clean, free of 
debris, and suitable for subsequent construction operations. Remove all 
debris, rubbish, and excess material from Medical Center Property. 

----- E N D ----- 


SECTION 32 05 23 
CEMENT AND CONCRETE FOR EXTERIOR IMPROVEMENTS 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This section shall cover site work concrete constructed upon the 
prepared subgrade and in conformance with the lines, grades, thickness, 
and cross sections shown on the Drawings. Construction shall include the 
following: 

B. Combination curb and gutter and wheel stop. 

C. Pedestrian Pavement: Walks, wheelchair curb ramps, and steps. 

D. Vehicular Pavement: Driveways and parking lots. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Section 00 72 00, GENERAL CONDITIONS. 

B. Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND SAMPLES 

C. Section 01 45 29, TESTING LABORATORY SERVICES. 

D. Section 03 30 00, CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE. 

E. Section 05 50 00, METAL FABRICATIONS. 

F. Section 31 20 00, EARTHWORK. 

1.3 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

A. Design all elements with the latest published version of applicable 
codes. 

1.4 WEATHER LIMITATIONS 

A. Hot Weather: Follow the recommendations of ACI 305 or as specified to 
prevent problems in the manufacturing, placing, and curing of concrete 
that can adversely affect the properties and serviceability of the 
hardened concrete. Methods proposed for cooling materials and 
arrangements for protecting concrete shall be made in advance of 
concrete placement and approved by Resident Engineer. 

B. Cold Weather: Follow the recommendations of ACI 306 or as specified to 
prevent freezing of concrete and to permit concrete to gain strength 
properly. Use only the specified non-corrosive, non-chloride 
accelerator. Do not use calcium chloride, thiocyantes or admixtures 
containing more than 0.05 percent chloride ions. Methods proposed for 
heating materials and arrangements for protecting concrete shall be made 
in advance of concrete placement and approved by Resident Engineer. 

1.5 SUBMITTALS 

Contractor shall submit the following. 

A. Manufacturers' Certificates and Data certifying that the following 
materials conform to the requirements specified. 

1. Expansion joint filler 


2. Hot poured sealing compound 

3. Reinforcement 

4. Curing materials 

B. Jointing Plan for all concrete areas. 

C. Concrete Mix Design. 

D. Concrete Test Reports 

E. Construction Staking Notes from Surveyor. 

1.6 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

 The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. Refer to the latest edition of all referenced 
Standards and codes. 

A. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
(AASHTO): 

M147-65-UL..............Materials for Aggregate and Soil-Aggregate 
Subbase, Base and Surface Courses (R 2004) 

M148-05-UL..............Liquid Membrane-Forming Compounds for Curing 
Concrete (ASTM C309) 

M171-05-UL..............Sheet Materials for Curing Concrete (ASTM C171) 

M182-05-UL..............Burlap Cloth Made from Jute or Kenaf and Cotton 
Mats 

B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

A82/A82M-07.............Standard Specification for Steel Wire, Plain, 
for Concrete Reinforcement 

A185/185M-07............Standard Specification for Steel Welded Wire 
Reinforcement, Plain, for Concrete 

A615/A615M-12...........Standard Specification for Deformed and Plain 
Carbon Steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement 

A653/A653M-11...........Standard Specification for Steel Sheet, Zinc 
Coated (Galvanized) or Zinc Iron Alloy Coated 
(Galvannealed) by the Hot Dip Process 

A706/A706M-09b..........Standard Specification for Low Alloy Steel 
Deformed and Plain Bars for Concrete 
Reinforcement 

A767/A767M-09...........Standard Specification for Zinc Coated 
(Galvanized) Steel Bars for Concrete 
Reinforcement 

A775/A775M-07b..........Standard Specification for Epoxy Coated 
Reinforcing Steel Bars 

A820/A820M-11...........Standard Specification for Steel Fibers for 
Fiber Reinforced Concrete 


C31/C31M-10.............Standard Practice for Making and Curing Concrete 
Test Specimens in the field 

C33/C33M-11a............Standard Specification for Concrete Aggregates 

C39/C39M-12.............Standard Test Method for Compressive Strength of 
Cylindrical Concrete Specimens 

C94/C94M-12.............Standard Specification for Ready Mixed Concrete 

C143/C143M-10a..........Standard Test Method for Slump of Hydraulic 
Cement Concrete 

C150/C150M-12...........Standard Specification for Portland Cement 

C171-07.................Standard Specification for Sheet Materials for 
Curing Concrete 

C172/C172M-10...........Standard Practice for Sampling Freshly Mixed 
Concrete 

C173/C173M-10b..........Standard Test Method for Air Content of Freshly 
Mixed Concrete by the Volumetric Method 

C192/C192M-07...........Standard Practice for Making and Curing Concrete 
Test Specimens in the Laboratory 

C231/C231M-10...........Standard Test Method for Air Content of Freshly 
Mixed Concrete by the Pressure Method 

C260/C260M-10a..........Standard Specification for Air Entraining 
Admixtures for Concrete 

C309-11.................Standard Specification for Liquid Membrane 
Forming Compounds for Curing Concrete 

C494/C494M-12...........Standard Specification for Chemical Admixtures 
for Concrete 

C618-12.................Standard Specification for Coal Fly Ash and Raw 
or Calcined Natural Pozzolan for Use in Concrete 

C666/C666M-03(2008).....Standard Test Method for Resistance of Concrete 
to Rapid Freezing and Thawing 

D1751-04(2008)..........Standard Specification for Preformed Expansion 
Joint Filler for Concrete Paving and Structural 
Construction (Non-extruding and Resilient 
Bituminous Types) 

D4263-83(2012)..........Standard Test Method for Indicating Moisture in 
Concrete by the Plastic Sheet Method. 

D4397-10................Standard Specification for Polyethylene Sheeting 
for Construction, Industrial and Agricultural 
Applications 

C. American Welding Society (AWS): 

D1.4/D1.4M (2005).......Structural Welding Code - Reinforcing Steel 


PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 GENERAL 

A. Concrete Type: Concrete shall be as per Table 1 – Concrete Type, air 
entrained. 

TABLE I – CONCRETE TYPE 

 

Concrete Strength 

Non-Air- 
Entrained 

Air-Entrained 

 

Min. 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

Psi 

Min. Cement 

lbs/c. yd 

Max. Water 
Cement 
Ratio 

Min. Cement 

lbs/c. yd 

Max. Water 

Cement 
Ratio 

Type A 

5000 

630 

0.45 

650 

0.40 

Type B 

4000 

550 

0.55 

570 

0.50 

Type C 

3000 

470 

0.65 

490 

0.55 

Type D 

3000 

500 

* 

520 

* 



 

1. If trial mixes are used, the proposed mix design shall achieve a 
compressive strength 1200 psi in excess of the compressed strength. 

2. For concrete exposed to high sulfate content soils maximum water 
cement ratio is 0.44. 

3. Determined by Laboratory in accordance with ACI 211.1 for normal 
concrete or ACI 211.2 for lightweight structural concrete. 

B. Maximum Slump: Maximum slump, as determined by ASTM C143 with tolerances 
as established by ASTM C94, for concrete to be vibrated shall be as 
shown in Table II. 

TABLE II – MAXIMUM SLUMP – INCHES (MM) 

TYPE 

MAXIMUM SLUMP* 

Curb & Gutter 

3 inches 

Pedestrian Pavement 

3 inches 

Vehicular Pavement 

2 inches (Machine Finished) 
4 inches (Hand Finished) 

 

 

* For concrete to be vibrated: Slump as determined by ASTM C143. 
Tolerances as established by ASTM C94. 



 

2.2 REINFORCEMENT 

A. The type, amount, and locations of steel reinforcement shall be as shown 
on the drawings and in the specifications. 

 


2.3 FORMS 

A. Use metal or wood forms that are straight and suitable in cross-section, 
depth, and strength to resist springing during depositing and 
consolidating the concrete, for the work involved. 

B. Do not use forms if they vary from a straight line more than 1/8 inch 
in any ten foot long section, in either a horizontal or vertical 
direction. 

C. Wood forms should be at least 2 inches thick (nominal). Wood forms shall 
also be free from warp, twist, loose knots, splits, or other defects. 
Use approved flexible or curved forms for forming radii. 

2.4 CONCRETE CURING MATERIALS 

A. Concrete curing materials shall conform to one of the following: 

1. Burlap having a weight of seven ounces or more per square yard when 
dry. 

2. Impervious Sheeting conforming to ASTM C171. 

 

3. Liquid Membrane Curing Compound conforming to ASTM C309, Type 2 and 
shall be free of paraffin or petroleum. 

2.5 EXPANSION JOINT FILLERS 

A. Material shall conform to ASTM D1751-04. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 SUBGRADE PENETRATION 

A. Prepare, construct, and finish the subgrade as specified in Section 31 
20 00, EARTHWORK. 

B. Maintain the subgrade in a smooth, compacted condition, in conformance 
with the required section and established grade until the succeeding 
operation has been accomplished. 

3.2 SETTING FORMS 

A. Base Support: 

1. Compact the base material under the forms true to grade so that, when 
set, they will be uniformly supported for their entire length at the 
grade as shown. 

2. Correct imperfections or variations in the base material grade by 
cutting or filling and compacting. 

B. Form Setting: 

1. Set forms sufficiently in advance of the placing of the concrete to 
permit the performance and approval of all operations required with 
and adjacent to the form lines. 

2. Set forms to true line and grade and use stakes, clamps, spreaders, 
and braces to hold them rigidly in place so that the forms and joints 
are free from play or movement in any direction. 


3. Forms shall conform to line and grade with an allowable tolerance of 
1/8 inch when checked with a straightedge and shall not deviate from 
true line by more than 1/4 inch at any point. 

4. Do not remove forms until removal will not result in damaged concrete 
or at such time to facilitate finishing. 

5. Clean and oil forms each time they are used. 

6. Make necessary corrections to forms immediately before placing 
concrete. 

7. When any form has been disturbed or any subgrade or base course has 
become unstable, reset and recheck the form before placing concrete. 

C. The Contractor’s Registered Professional Land Surveyor, specified in 
Section 00 72 00, GENERAL CONDITIONS, shall establish the control, 
alignment and the grade elevations of the forms or concrete slipforming 
machine operations. Staking notes shall be submitted for approval to the 
Resident Engineer prior to placement of concrete. If discrepancies exist 
between the field conditions and the Drawings, Contractor shall notify 
Resident Engineer immediately. No placement of concrete shall occur if a 
discrepancy greater than 1 inch is discovered. 

3.3 EQUIPMENT 

A. The Resident Engineer shall approve equipment and tools necessary for 
handling materials and performing all parts of the work prior to 
commencement of work. 

B. Maintain equipment and tools in satisfactory working condition at all 
times. 

3.4 PLACING REINFORCEMENT 

A. Reinforcement shall be free from dirt, oil, rust, scale or other 
substances that prevent the bonding of the concrete to the 
reinforcement. All reinforcement shall be supported for proper placement 
within the concrete section. 

B. Before the concrete is placed, the Resident Engineer shall approve the 
reinforcement placement, which shall be accurately and securely fastened 
in place with suitable supports and ties. The type, amount, and position 
of the reinforcement shall be as shown on the Drawings. 

3.5 PLACING CONCRETE - GENERAL 

A. Obtain approval of the Resident Engineer before placing concrete. 

B. Remove debris and other foreign material from between the forms before 
placing concrete. 

C. Before the concrete is placed, uniformly moisten the base course 
appropriately, avoiding puddles of water. 


D. Convey concrete from mixer to final place of deposit by a method which 
will prevent segregation or loss of ingredients. Deposit concrete so 
that it requires as little handling as possible. 

E. While being placed, spade or vibrate and compact the concrete with 
suitable tools to prevent the formation of voids or honeycomb pockets. 
Vibrate concrete well against forms and along joints. Over-vibration or 
manipulation causing segregation will not be permitted. Place concrete 
continuously between joints without bulkheads. 

F. Install a construction joint whenever the placing of concrete is 
suspended for more than 30 minutes and at the end of each day's work. 

G. Workmen or construction equipment coated with foreign material shall not 
be permitted to walk or operate in the concrete during placement and 
finishing operations. 

H. Cracked or Chipped Concrete Surfaces and Bird Baths. Cracked or chipped 
concrete and bird baths will not be allowed. Concrete with cracks or 
chips and bird baths will be removed and replaced to the nearest joints, 
and as approved by the Resident Engineer, by the Contractor with no 
additional cost to the Government. 

3.6 PLACING CONCRETE FOR CURB AND GUTTER AND PEDESTRIAN PAVEMENT 

A. Place concrete in the forms in one layer of such thickness that, when 
compacted and finished, it will conform to the cross section as shown. 

B. Deposit concrete as near to joints as possible without disturbing them 
but do not dump onto a joint assembly. 

C. After the concrete has been placed in the forms, use a strike-off guided 
by the side forms to bring the surface to the proper section to be 
compacted. 

D. Consolidate the concrete thoroughly by tamping and spading, or with 
approved mechanical finishing equipment. 

E. Finish the surface to grade with a wood or metal float. 

F. All Concrete pads and pavements shall be constructed with sufficient 
slope to drain properly. 

3.7 PLACING CONCRETE FOR VEHICULAR PAVEMENT 

A. Deposit concrete into the forms as close as possible to its final 
position. 

B. Place concrete rapidly and continuously between construction joints. 

C. Strike off concrete and thoroughly consolidate by a finishing machine, 
vibrating screed, or by hand-finishing. 

D. Finish the surface to the elevation and crown as shown. 

E. Deposit concrete as near the joints as possible without disturbing them 
but do not dump onto a joint assembly. Do not place adjacent lanes 
without approval by the Resident Engineer. 


3.8 CONCRETE FINISHING - GENERAL 

A. The sequence of operations, unless otherwise indicated, shall be as 
follows: 

1. Consolidating, floating, straight-edging, troweling, texturing, and 
edging of joints. 

2. Maintain finishing equipment and tools in a clean and approved 
condition. 

3.9 CONCRETE FINISHING CURB AND GUTTER 

A. Round the edges of the gutter and top of the curb with an edging tool to 
a radius of 1/4 inch or as otherwise detailed. 

B. Float the surfaces and finish with a smooth wood or metal float until 
true to grade and section and uniform in textures. 

C. Finish the surfaces, while still wet, with a bristle type brush with 
longitudinal strokes. 

D. Immediately after removing the front curb form, rub the face of the curb 
with a wood or concrete rubbing block and water until blemishes, form 
marks, and tool marks have been removed. Brush the surface, while still 
wet, in the same manner as the gutter and curb top. 

E. Except at grade changes or curves, finished surfaces shall not vary more 
than 1/8 inch for gutter and 1/4 inch for top and face of curb, when 
tested with a 10 foot straightedge. 

F. Remove and reconstruct irregularities exceeding the above for the full 
length between regularly scheduled joints. 

G. Correct any depressions which will not drain. See Article 3.6, Paragraph 
H, above. 

H. Visible surfaces and edges of finished curb, gutter, and/or combination 
curb and gutter shall be free of blemishes, form marks, and tool marks, 
and shall be uniform in color, shape, and appearance. 

3.10 CONCRETE FINISHING PEDESTRIAN PAVEMENT 

A. Walks, steps, and Wheelchair Curb Ramps: 

1. Finish the surfaces to grade and cross section with a metal float, 
troweled smooth and finished with a broom moistened with clear water. 

2. Brooming shall be transverse to the line of traffic. 

3. Finish all slab edges, including those at formed joints, carefully 
with an edger having a radius as shown on the Drawings. 

4. Unless otherwise indicated, edge the transverse joints before 
brooming. The brooming shall eliminate the flat surface left by the 
surface face of the edger. Execute the brooming so that the 
corrugation, thus produced, will be uniform in appearance and not 
more than 1/16 inch in depth. 


5. The completed surface shall be uniform in color and free of surface 
blemishes, form marks, and tool marks. The finished surface of the 
pavement shall not vary more than 3/16 inch when tested with a 10 
foot straightedge. 

6. The thickness of the pavement shall not vary more than 1/4 inch. 

7. Remove and reconstruct irregularities exceeding the above for the 
full length between regularly scheduled joints at no additional cost 
to the Government. 

B. Steps: The method of finishing the steps and the sidewalls is similar to 
above except as herein noted. 

1. Remove the riser forms one at a time, starting with the top riser. 

2. After removing the riser form, rub the face of the riser with a wood 
or concrete rubbing block and water until blemishes, form marks, and 
tool marks have been removed. Use an outside edger to round the 
corner of the tread; use an inside edger to finish the corner at the 
bottom of the riser. 

3. Give the risers and sidewall a final brush finish. The treads shall 
have a final finish with a stiff brush to provide a non-slip surface. 

4. The texture of the completed steps shall present a neat and uniform 
appearance and shall not deviate from a straightedge test more than 
3/16 inch. 

3.11 CONCRETE FINISHING FOR VEHICULAR PAVEMENT 

A. Accomplish longitudinal floating with a longitudinal float not less than 
10 feet long and 6 inches wide, properly stiffened to prevent flexing 
and warping. Operate the float from foot bridges in a sawing motion 
parallel to the direction in which the pavement is being laid from one 
side of the pavement to the other, and advancing not more than half the 
length of the float. 

B. After the longitudinal floating is completed, but while the concrete is 
still plastic, eliminate minor irregularities in the pavement surfaces 
by means of metal floats, 5 feet in length, and straightedges, 10 feet 
in length. Make the final finish with the straightedges, which shall be 
used to float the entire pavement surface. 

C. Test the surface for trueness with a 10 foot straightedge held in 
successive positions parallel and at right angles to the direction in 
which the pavement is being laid and the entire area covered as 
necessary to detect variations. Advance the straightedge along the 
pavement in successive stages of not more than one half the length of 
the straightedge. Correct all irregularities and refinish the surface. 


D. The finished surface of the pavement shall not vary more than 1/4 inch 
in both longitudinal and transverse directions when tested with a 10 
foot straightedge. 

E. The thickness of the pavement shall not vary more than 1/4 inch. 

F. When most of the water glaze or sheen has disappeared and before the 
concrete becomes nonplastic, give the surface of the pavement a broomed 
finish with an approved fiber broom not less than 18 inches wide. Pull 
the broom gently over the surface of the pavement from edge to edge. 
Brooming shall be transverse to the line of traffic and so executed that 
the corrugations thus produced will be uniform in character and width, 
and not more than 1/8 inch in depth. Carefully finish the edge of the 
pavement along forms and at the joints with an edging tool. The brooming 
shall eliminate the flat surface left by the surface face of the edger. 

G. The finish surfaces of new and existing abutting pavements shall be 
flush and in alignment at their juncture. 

3.12 CONCRETE FINISHING EQUIPMENT PADS 

A. After the surface has been struck off and screeded to the proper 
elevation, provide a smooth dense float finish, free from depressions or 
irregularities. 

B. Carefully finish all slab edges with an edger having a radius as shown 
in the Drawings. 

C. After removing the forms, rub the faces of the pad with a wood or 
concrete rubbing block and water until blemishes, form marks, and tool 
marks have been removed. The finish surface of the pad shall not vary 
more than 1/8 inch when tested with a 10 foot straightedge. 

D. Correct irregularities exceeding the above. See Article 3.6, Paragraph 
H, above. 

3.13 JOINTS - GENERAL 

A. Place joints, where shown on the Shop Drawings and Drawings, conforming 
to the details as shown, and perpendicular to the finished grade of the 
concrete surface. 

B. Joints shall be straight and continuous from edge to edge of the 
pavement. 

3.14 CONTRACTION JOINTS 

A. Cut joints to depth as shown with a grooving tool or jointer of a radius 
as shown or by sawing with a blade producing the required width and 
depth. 

B. Construct joints in curbs and gutters by inserting 1/8 inch steel plates 
conforming to the cross sections of the curb and gutter. 

C. Plates shall remain in place until concrete has set sufficiently to hold 
its shape and shall then be removed. 


D. Finish edges of all joints with an edging tool having the radius as 
shown. 

E. Score pedestrian pavement with a standard grooving tool or jointer. 

3.15 EXPANSION JOINTS 

A. Use a preformed expansion joint filler material of the thickness as 
shown to form expansion joints. 

B. Material shall extend the full depth of concrete, cut and shaped to the 
cross section as shown, except that top edges of joint filler shall be 
below the finished concrete surface where shown to allow for sealing. 

C. Anchor with approved devices to prevent displacing during placing and 
finishing operations. 

D. Round the edges of joints with an edging tool. 

E. Form expansion joints as follows: 

1. Without dowels, about structures and features that project through, 
into, or against any site work concrete construction. 

2. Using joint filler of the type, thickness, and width as shown. 

3. Installed in such a manner as to form a complete, uniform separation 
between the structure and the site work concrete item. 

3.16 CONSTRUCTION JOINTS 

A. Locate construction joints between slabs of vehicular pavement as shown 
on the Shop Drawing jointing plan and Drawings. 

B. Place construction joints of the type shown, where indicated and 
whenever the placing of concrete is suspended for more than 30 minutes. 

C. Use a butt-type joint in curb and gutter if the joint occurs at the 
location of a planned joint. 

D. Use keyed joints with tiebars if the joint occurs in the middle third of 
the normal curb and gutter joint interval. 

3.17 FORM REMOVAL 

A. Forms shall remain in place at least 12 hours after the concrete has 
been placed. Remove forms without injuring the concrete. 

B. Do not use bars or heavy tools against the concrete in removing the 
forms. Promptly repair any concrete found defective after form removal. 

3.18 CURING OF CONCRETE 

A. Cure concrete by one of the following methods appropriate to the weather 
conditions and local construction practices, against loss of moisture, 
and rapid temperature changes for at least seven days from the beginning 
of the curing operation. Protect unhardened concrete from rain and 
flowing water. All equipment needed for adequate curing and protection 
of the concrete shall be on hand and ready to install before actual 
concrete placement begins. Provide protection as necessary to prevent 


cracking of the pavement due to temperature changes during the curing 
period. If any selected method of curing does not afford the proper 
curing and protection against concrete cracking, remove and replace the 
damaged pavement and employ another method of curing as directed by the 
Resident Engineer. 

B. Burlap Mat: Provide a minimum of two layers kept saturated with water 
for the curing period. Mats shall overlap each other at least 6 inches. 

C. Impervious Sheeting: Use waterproof paper, polyethylene-coated burlap, 
or polyethylene sheeting. Polyethylene shall be at least 4 mils (0.1 mm) 
in thickness. Wet the entire exposed concrete surface with a fine spray 
of water and then cover with the sheeting material. Sheets shall overlap 
each other at least 12 inches. Securely anchor sheeting. 

D. Liquid Membrane Curing: 

1. Apply pigmented membrane-forming curing compound in two coats at 
right angles to each other at a rate of 200 square feet per gallon 
for both coats. 

2. Do not allow the concrete to dry before the application of the 
membrane. 

3. Cure joints designated to be sealed by inserting moistened paper or 
fiber rope or covering with waterproof paper prior to application of 
the curing compound, in a manner to prevent the curing compound 
entering the joint. 

4. Immediately re-spray any area covered with curing compound and 
damaged during the curing period. 

3.19 CLEANING 

A. After completion of the curing period: 

1. Remove the curing material (other than liquid membrane). 

2. Sweep the concrete clean. 

3. After removal of all foreign matter from the joints, seal joints as 
specified. 

4. Clean the entire concrete of all debris and construction equipment as 
soon as curing and sealing of joints has been completed. 

3.20 PROTECTION 

A. The contractor shall protect the concrete against all damage prior to 
final acceptance by the Government. Remove concrete containing excessive 
cracking, fractures, spalling, or other defects and reconstruct the 
entire section between regularly scheduled joints, when directed by the 
Resident Engineer, and at no additional cost to the Government. Exclude 
traffic from vehicular pavement until the concrete is at least seven 
days old, or for a longer period of time if so directed by the Resident 
Engineer. 


3.21 FINAL CLEAN-UP 

A. Remove all debris, rubbish and excess material from the Station. 

- - - E N D - - - 

 

 


SECTION 32 12 16 
ASPHALT PAVING 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This work shall cover the composition, mixing, construction upon the 
prepared subgrade, and the protection of hot asphalt concrete pavement. 
The hot asphalt concrete pavement shall consist of an aggregate and/or 
asphalt base course and asphalt surface course constructed in conformity 
with the lines, grades, thickness, and cross sections as shown. Each 
course shall be constructed to the depth, section, or elevation required 
by the drawings and shall be rolled, finished, and approved before the 
placement of the next course. 

1.2 RELATED WORK 

A. Laboratory and field testing requirements: Section 01 45 29, TESTING 
LABORATORY SERVICES. 

B. Subgrade Preparation: Paragraph 3.3 and Section 31 20 00, EARTH MOVING. 

C. Pavement Markings: Section 32 17 23, PAVEMENT MARKINGS. 

1.3 INSPECTION OF PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 

A. The Resident Engineer shall have access at all times to all parts of the 
material producing plants for checking the mixing operations and 
materials and the adequacy of the equipment in use. 

1.4 ALIGNMENT AND GRADE CONTROL 

A. The Contractor’s Registered Professional Land Surveyor shall establish 
and control the pavement (aggregate or asphalt base course and asphalt 
surface course) alignments, grades, elevations, and cross sections as 
shown on the Drawings. 

1.5 SUBMITTALS 

A. In accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND 
SAMPLES, furnish the following: 

B. Data and Test Reports: 

1. Aggregate Base Course: Sources, gradation, liquid limit, plasticity 
index, percentage of wear, and other tests required by State Highway 
Department. 

2. Asphalt Base/Surface Course: Aggregate source, gradation, soundness 
loss, percentage of wear, and other tests required by State Highway 
Department. 

3. Job-mix formula. 

C. Certifications: 


1. Asphalt tack coat material certificate of conformance to State 
Highway Department requirements. 

2. Asphalt cement certificate of conformance to State Highway Department 
requirements. 

 

3. Job-mix certification - Submit plant mix certification that mix 
equals or exceeds the State Highway Specification. 

D. One copy of State Highway Department Specifications. 

E. Provide MSDS (Material Safety Data Sheets) for all chemicals used on 
ground. 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 GENERAL 

A. Aggregate base, Asphaltic base and asphalt concrete materials shall 
conform to the requirements of the following and other appropriate 
sections of the latest version of the State Highway Material 
Specifications, including amendments, addenda and errata. Where the term 
"Engineer" or "Commission" is referenced in the State Highway 
Specifications, it shall mean the VA Resident Engineer or VA Contracting 
Officer. 

2.2 AGGREGATES 

A. Provide aggregates consisting of crushed stone, gravel, sand, or other 
sound, durable mineral materials processed and blended, and naturally 
combined. 

B. Base aggregate maximum size = 1-inch. 

C. Asphaltic base course: 

1. Maximum particle size not to exceed 1-inch. 

2. Where conflicts arise between this specification and the requirements 
in the latest version of the State Highway Specifications, the State 
Specifications shall control. 

D. Aggregates for asphaltic concrete paving: Provide a mixture of sand, 
mineral aggregate, and liquid asphalt mixed in such proportions that the 
percentage by weight will be within: 

 

Sieve Sizes 

Percentage Passing 

19mm(3/4") 

100 

9.5mm(3/8") 

67 to 85 

6.4mm(1/4") 

50 to 65 

2.4mm(No. 8 mesh) 

37 to 50 

600µm(No. 30 mesh) 

15 to 25 

75µm(No. 200 mesh) 

3 to 8 



 


 plus 50/60 penetration liquid asphalt at 5 percent to 6-1/2 percent of 
the combined dry aggregates. 

2.3 ASPHALTS 

A. Comply with provisions of Asphalt Institute Specification SS2: 

1. Asphalt cement: Penetration grade 50/60 

2. Tack coat: Uniformly emulsified, grade SS-1H 

2.4 ASPHALT MIXES 

A. Asphalt Concrete Hot Mix Binder Course: AHTD, Type II. 

B. Asphalt Concrete Hot Mix Surface Couse: AHTD, Type 2 or 3. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 GENERAL 

A. The Asphalt Concrete Paving equipment, weather limitations, job-mix 
formula, mixing, construction methods, compaction, finishing, tolerance, 
and protection shall conform to the requirements of the appropriate 
sections of the State Highway Specifications for the type of material 
specified. 

3.2 MIXING ASPHALTIC CONCRETE MATERIALS 

A. Provide hot plant-mixed asphaltic concrete paving materials. 

1. Temperature leaving the plant: 290 degrees F minimum, 320 degrees F 
maximum. 

2. Temperature at time of placing: 280 degrees F minimum. 

3.3 SUBGRADE 

A. Shape to line and grade and compact with self-propelled rollers. 

B. All depressions that develop under rolling shall be filled with 
acceptable material and the area re-rolled. 

C. Soft areas shall be removed and filled with acceptable materials and the 
area re-rolled. 

D. Should the subgrade become rutted or displaced prior to the placing of 
the base, it shall be reworked to bring to line and grade. 

E. Proof-roll the subgrade with maximum 50 ton gross weight dump truck as 
directed by VA Resident Engineer or VA Contracting Officer. If pumping, 
pushing, or other movement is observed, rework the area to provide a 
stable and compacted subgrade. 

3.4 BASE COURSES 

A. Base 

1. Spread and compact to the thickness shown on the drawings. 

2. Rolling shall begin at the sides and continue toward the center and 
shall continue until there is no movement ahead of the roller. 

3. After completion of the base rolling there shall be no hauling over 
the base other than the delivery of material for the top course. 


B. Thickness tolerance: Provide the compacted thicknesses shown on the 
Drawings within a tolerance of minus 0.0" to plus 0.5". 

C. Smoothness tolerance: Provide the lines and grades shown on the Drawings 
within a tolerance of 3/16 inch in ten feet. 

D. Moisture content: Use only the amount of moisture needed to achieve the 
specified compaction. 

3.5 PLACEMENT OF ASPHALTIC CONCRETE PAVING 

A. Remove all loose materials from the compacted base. 

B. Apply the specified tack coat where required, and allow to dry in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations as approved by the 
Architect or Engineer. 

C. Receipt of asphaltic concrete materials: 

1. Do not accept material unless it is covered with a tarpaulin until 
unloaded, and unless the material has a temperature of not less than 
280 degrees F. 

2. Do not commence placement of asphaltic concrete materials when the 
atmospheric temperature is below 50 degrees F, not during fog, rain, 
or other unsuitable conditions. 

D. Spreading: 

1. Spread material in a manner that requires the least handling. 

2. Where thickness of finished paving will be 3" or less, spread in one 
layer. 

E. Rolling: 

1. After the material has been spread to the proper depth, roll until 
the surface is hard, smooth, unyielding, and true to the thickness 
and elevations shown own the drawings. 

2. Roll in at least two directions until no roller marks are visible. 

3. Finished paving smoothness tolerance: 

a. No depressions which will retain standing water. 

b. No deviation greater than 1/8" in six feet. 

F. Contractor shall conform to the Arkansas Highway and Transportation 
Department (AHTD) Standard Specifications for Workmanship. Measurement 
and Payment provisions shall not apply. 

3.6 FINAL CLEAN-UP 

A. Remove all debris, rubbish, and excess material from the work area. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 32 17 23 
PAVEMENT MARKINGS 

 

PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 DESCRIPTION 

A. This work shall consist of furnishing and applying paint and reflective 
glass beads on pavement surfaces, in the form of traffic lanes, parking 
bays, crosswalks, and other detail pavement markings, in accordance with 
the details as shown or as prescribed by the Resident Engineer. Conform 
to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and 
Highways, published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal 
Highway Administration, for details not shown. 

1.2 SUBMITTALS 

A. In accordance with Section 01 33 23, SHOP DRAWINGS, PRODUCT DATA, AND 
SAMPLES, furnish Manufacturer's Certificates and Data certifying that 
the following materials conform to the requirements specified. 

B. Paint. 

C. Reflective Glass Beads. 

1.3 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by the 
basic designation only. 

B. Federal Specifications (Fed. Spec.): 

TT-B-1325C..............Beads (Glass Spheres); Retro-Reflective 

TT-P-1952D..............Paint, Traffic Black, and Airfield Marking, 
Waterborne 

C. Master Painters Institute (MPI): 


Approved Product List - 2010 

PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 PAINT 

A. Paint for marking pavement (parking lot and zone marking) shall conform 
to MPI No. 97, color as shown. Paint for obliterating existing markings 
shall conform to Fed. Spec. TT-P-1952D. Paint shall be in containers of 
at least 18 L (5 gallons). A certificate shall accompany each batch of 
paint stating compliance with the applicable publication. 

2.2 REFLECTIVE GLASS BEADS 

A. Beads shall conform to Fed. Spec. TT-B-1325C, Type I, Gradation A. When 
used in regions of high humidity, coat beads with silicone or other 
suitable waterproofing material to assure free flow. Furnish the glass 
beads in containers suitable for handling and strong enough to prevent 


loss during shipment. A certificate shall accompany each batch of beads 
stating compliance with this section. 

2.3 PAINT APPLICATOR 

A. Apply all marking by approved mechanical equipment. The equipment shall 
provide constant agitation of paint and travel at controlled speeds. 
Synchronize one or more paint "guns" to automatically begin and cut off 
paint flow in the case of skip lines. The equipment shall have manual 
control to apply continuous lines of varying length and marking widths 
as shown. Provide pneumatic spray guns for hand application of paint in 
areas where a mobile paint applicator cannot be used. If the equipment 
does not have a glass bead dispenser, use a separate piece of equipment. 
Adjust and synchronize the equipment with the paint applicator so that 
the reflective beads are distributed uniformly on the paint lines within 
ten seconds without any waste. An experienced technician that is 
thoroughly familiar with equipment, materials, and marking layouts shall 
control all painting equipment and operations. 

2.4 SANDBLASTING EQUIPMENT 

A. Sandblasting equipment shall include an air compressor, hoses, and 
nozzles of proper size and capacity as required for cleaning surfaces to 
be painted. The compressor shall furnish not less than 150 cfm of air at 
a pressure of not less than 90 psi at each nozzle used. 

PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 SURFACE PREPARATION 

A. Allow new pavement surfaces to cure for a period of not less than 14 
days before application of marking materials. 

B. Thoroughly clean all surfaces to be marked before application of paint. 
Remove dust, dirt, and other granular surface deposits by sweeping, 
blowing with compressed air, rinsing with water, or a combination of 
these methods. Completely remove rubber deposits, existing paint 
markings, and other coatings adhering to the pavement with scrapers, 
wire brushings, sandblasting, mechanical abrasion, or approved chemicals 
as directed by the Resident Engineer. The application of paint 
conforming to Fed. Spec. TT-P-1952D is an option to removal of existing 
paint markings on asphalt pavement. Apply the black paint in as many 
coats as necessary to completely obliterate the existing markings. Where 
oil or grease are present on old pavements to be marked, scrub affected 
areas with several applications of trisodium phosphate solution or other 
approved detergent or degreaser, and rinse thoroughly after each 
application. After cleaning, seal oil-soaked areas with cut shellac to 
prevent bleeding through the new paint. Pavement marking shall follow as 


closely as practicable after the surface has been cleaned and dried, but 
do not begin any marking until the Resident Engineer has inspected the 
surface and gives permission to proceed. The Contractor shall establish 
control points for marking and provide templates to control paint 
application by type and color at necessary intervals. The Contractor is 
responsible to preserve and apply marking in conformance with the 
established control points. 

3.2 APPLICATION 

A. Apply uniformly painted and reflective pavement marking of required 
color(s), length, and width with true, sharp edges and ends on properly 
cured, prepared, and dried surfaces in conformance with the details as 
shown and established control points. The length and width of lines 
shall conform within a tolerance of plus or minus 3 inches and plus or 
minus 1/8 inch, respectively, in the case of skip markings. The length 
of intervals shall not exceed the line length tolerance. Temperature of 
the surface to be painted and the atmosphere shall be above 50.F and 
less than 95.F. Apply the paint at a wet film thickness of 0.015 inch. 
Disperse reflective glass beads evenly on the wet paint at a rate of 6 
pounds per gallon of paint. Apply paint in one coat. At the direction of 
the Resident Engineer, markings showing light spots may receive 
additional coats. The maximum drying time requirements of the paint 
specifications will be strictly enforced, to prevent undue softening of 
asphalt, and pick-up, displacement, or discoloration by tires of 
traffic. If there is a deficiency in drying of the marking, discontinue 
paint operations until cause of the slow drying is determined and 
corrected. Remove and replace marking that is applied at less than 
minimum material rates; deviates from true alignment; exceeds stipulated 
length and width tolerances; or shows light spots, faulty distribution 
of beads, smears, or other deficiencies or irregularities. Use carefully 
controlled sand blasting, approved grinding equipment, or other approved 
method to remove marking so that the surface to which the marking was 
applied will not be damaged. 

3.3 PROTECTION 

A. Conduct operations in such a manner that necessary traffic can move 
without hindrance. Protect the newly painted markings so that, insofar 
as possible, the tires of passing vehicles will not pick up paint. Place 
warning signs at the beginning of the wet line, and at points well in 
advance of the marking equipment for alerting approaching traffic from 
both directions. Place small flags or other similarly effective small 
objects near freshly applied markings at frequent intervals to reduce 


crossing by traffic. Efface and replace damaged portions of markings at 
no additional cost to the Government. 

3.4 DETAIL PAVEMENT MARKING 

A. Use Detail Pavement Markings, exclusive of actual traffic lane marking, 
at exit and entrance islands and turnouts, on curbs, at crosswalks, at 
parking bays, and at such other locations as shown. Place detail 
pavement markings of the color(s), width(s) and length(s), and design 
pattern at the locations shown. 

3.5 FINAL CLEAN-UP 

A. Remove all debris, rubbish and excess material from the Station. 

- - - E N D - - - 


SECTION 32 90 00 

PLANTING 

 GENERAL 

 DESCRIPTION 

A. The work in this section consists of furnishing and installing grasses 
required as specified in locations shown. 






 RELATED WORK 

A. Topsoil Testing: Section 01 45 29, TESTING LABORATORY SERVICES. 
B. Section 01 57 19, TEMPORARY ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS. 
C. Stripping Topsoil, Stock Piling and Topsoil Materials: Section 31 20 00, 
EARTH MOVING. 






 DEFINITIONS 

A. Backfill: The earth used to replace earth in an excavation. 
B. Finish Grade: Elevation of finished surface of planting. 
C. Pesticide: A substance or mixture intended for preventing, destroying, 
repelling, or mitigating a pest. This includes insecticides, miticides, 
herbicides, fungicides, rodenticides, and molluscicides. It also includes 
substances or mixtures intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, 
or desiccant. 
D. Planting Soil: Standardized topsoil; existing, native surface topsoil; 
existing, in-place surface soil; imported topsoil; or manufactured 
topsoil that is modified with soil amendments and perhaps fertilizers to 
produce a soil mixture best for plant growth. 
E. Plant Material: These terms refer to vegetation in general, including 
turf and grasses. 
F. Subgrade: Surface or elevation of subsoil remaining after excavation is 
complete, or the top surface of a fill or backfill before planting soil 
is placed. 
G. Subsoil: All soil beneath the topsoil layer of the soil profile, and 
typified by the lack of organic matter and soil organisms. 






 ABBREVIATIONS 

 DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 

A. Notify the Contracting Officer’s Representative of the delivery schedule 
in advance so the plant material may be inspected upon arrival at the job 
site. Remove unacceptable landscape materials from the job site 
immediately. 
B. Deliver packaged materials in original, unopened containers showing 
weight, certified analysis, name and address of manufacturer, and 







indication of conformance with state and federal laws, as applicable. 
Keep packaged materials in dry storage away from contaminants. 
C. Bulk Materials: 
1. Do not dump or store bulk materials near structures, utilities, 
walkways and pavements, or on existing turf areas or plants. Keep bulk 
materials in dry storage away from contaminants. 
2. Provide erosion control measures to prevent erosion or displacement of 
bulk materials, discharge of soil-bearing water runoff, and airborne 
dust reaching adjacent properties, water conveyance systems, or 
walkways. 
3. Accompany each delivery of bulk fertilizers, lime, and soil amendments 
with appropriate certificates. 


D. Harvest, deliver, store, and handle sod according to requirements in 
TPI's "Guideline Specifications to Turfgrass Sodding". Deliver sod in 
time for planting within 24 hours of harvesting. Protect sod from 
breakage, seed contamination and drying. 
E. All pesticides and herbicides shall be properly labeled and registered 
with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Deliver materials in original, 
unopened containers showing, certified analysis, name and address of 
manufacturer, product label, manufacturer’s application instructions 
specific to the project and indication of conformance with state and 
federal laws, as applicable. 






 PROJECT CONDITIONS 

A. Verify actual grade elevations, service and utility locations, irrigation 
system components, and dimensions of plantings and construction 
contiguous with new plantings by field measurements before proceeding 
with planting work. 
B. Proceed with planting only when existing and forecasted weather 
conditions permit planting to be performed when beneficial and optimum 
results may be obtained. Apply products during favorable weather 
conditions according to manufacturer's written instructions and warranty 
requirements. 






 QUALITY ASSURANCE: 

A. Installer Qualifications: A qualified landscape installer whose work has 
resulted in successful establishment of plants. 
1. Installer shall be a member in good standing of either the 
Professional Landcare Network or the American Nursery and Landscape 
Association with 3 years experience in landscape installation. 









2. Require Installer to maintain an experienced full-time supervisor on 
Project site when work is in progress. 
3. Pesticide Applicator: Licensed in state of project, commercial. 


B. Include an independent or university laboratory, recognized by the State 
Department of Agriculture, with the experience and capability to conduct 
the testing indicated and that specializes in types of tests to be 
performed. 
C. For each unamended soil type, furnish soil analysis and a written report 
by a qualified soil-testing laboratory stating percentages of organic 
matter; gradation of sand, silt, and clay content; cation exchange 
capacity; deleterious material; pH; and mineral and plant-nutrient 
content of the soil. 
1. Testing methods and written recommendations shall comply with USDA's 
Handbook No. 60, “Diagnosis and Improvement of Saline and Alkali 
Soils”. 
2. The soil-testing laboratory shall oversee soil sampling; with depth, 
location, and number of samples to be taken per instructions from 
Contracting Officer’s Representative. A minimum of 3 representative 
samples shall be taken from varied locations for each soil to be used 
or amended for planting purposes. 
3. Report suitability of tested soil for plant growth. 
a. Based upon the test results, state recommendations for soil 
treatments and soil amendments to be incorporated. State 
recommendations in weight per 1000 sq. ft. or volume per cu. yd for 
nitrogen, phosphorus, and potash nutrients and soil amendments to 
be added to produce satisfactory planting soil suitable for 
healthy, viable plants. 
b. Report presence of problem salts, minerals, or heavy metals, 
including aluminum, arsenic, barium, cadmium, chromium, cobalt, 
lead, lithium, and vanadium. If such problem materials are present, 
provide additional recommendations for corrective action. 




D. Contracting Officer’s Representative may observe plant material either at 
place of growth or at site before planting for compliance with 
requirements for genus, species, variety, cultivar, size, and quality. 
1. Notify Contracting Officer’s Representative of plant material sources 
seven days in advance of delivery to site. 


E. Include product label and manufacturer's literature and data for 
pesticides and herbicides. 







F. Conduct a pre-installation conference at Project site. 






 SUBMITTALS 

A. Submit product data for each type of product indicated, including soils: 
1. Include quantities, sizes, quality, and sources for plant materials. 
2. Include EPA approved product label, MSDS (Material Safety Data Sheet) 
and manufacturer's application instructions specific to the Project. 


B. Prior to delivery, provide notarized certificates attesting that each 
type of manufactured product, from the manufacturer, meet the 
requirements specified and shall be submitted to the Contracting 
Officer’s Representative for approval: 
1. Turf Materials notarized certificate of product analysis. 
2. Manufacturer's certified analysis of standard products. 
3. Analysis of other materials by a recognized laboratory made according 
to methods established by the Association of Official Analytical 
Chemists, where applicable. 


C. Material Test Reports: For existing native surface topsoil and imported 
or manufactured topsoil. 
D. Maintenance Instructions: Recommended procedures to be established by 
Owner for maintenance of plants during a calendar year. Submit before 
start of required maintenance periods. 






 TURF ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD 

A. The establishment period for turf shall begin immediately after 
installation, with the approval of the Contracting Officer’s 
Representative, and continue until the date that the Government accepts 
the project or phase for beneficial use and occupancy. During the 
Establishment Period the Contractor shall maintain the turf as required 
in Part 3. 






 TURF MAINTENANCE SERVICE 

A. Provide initial maintenance service for turf by skilled employees of 
landscape Installer. Begin maintenance immediately after plants are 
installed and continue until plantings are acceptably healthy and well 
established but for not less than maintenance period below. 
1. Maintenance Period: 3 months from date of planting completion. 








 APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS 

A. The publications listed below, form a part of this specification to the 
extent referenced. The publications are referenced in the text by basic 
designation only. 
B. American National Standards Institute (ANSI): 







Z60.1-04................Nursery Stock 

C. Hortus Third: A Concise Dictionary of Plants Cultivated in the United 
States and Canada. 
D. Turfgrass Producers International (TPI): Guideline Specifications to 
Turfgrass Sodding. 
E. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA): Handbook No. 60 Diagnosis 
and Improvement of Saline and Alkali Soils; Federal Seed Act Regulations. 






 WARRANTY 

A. The Contractor shall remedy any defect due to faulty material or 
workmanship and pay for any damage to other work resulting therefrom 
within a period of one year from final acceptance, unless noted otherwise 
below. Further, the Contractor will provide all manufacturer's and 
supplier's written guarantees and warranties covering materials and 
equipment furnished under this Contract. 
1. Turf Warranty Periods will begin from the date of planting completion. 
2. The Contractor shall have completed, located, and installed all turf 
according to the plans and specifications. All turf is expected to be 
living and in a healthy condition at the time of final inspection. 
3. The Contractor will replace any areas void of turf immediately, unless 
required to plant in the succeeding planting season. Provide extended 
warranty for period equal to original warranty period for replacement 
plant materials. Replacement turf warranty will begin on the day the 
work is completed. 
4. The Government will reinspect all turf at the end of the Warranty 
Period. The Contractor will replace any dead, missing, or defective 
turf immediately. The Warranty Period will end on the date of this 
inspection provided the Contractor has complied with the warranty work 
required by this specification. The Contractor shall also comply with 
the following requirements: 
a. Complete remedial measures directed by the Contracting Officer’s 
Representative to ensure turf survival. 
b. Repair damage caused while making turf replacements. 










 PRODUCTS 

 PLANT MATERIAL 

A. Turf materials: ANSI Z60.1; will conform to the varieties specified and 
be true to botanical name as listed in Hortus Third; nursery-grown turf 
material true to genus, species, variety, and other features indicated on 







Drawings; free of disease, pests, eggs, larvae, and defects such as sun 
scald, windburn, injuries, abrasions, and disfigurement. 






 INORGANIC SOIL AMENDMENTS 

A. Lime: ASTM C602, agricultural liming material containing a minimum of 80 
percent calcium carbonate equivalent and as follows: 
1. Class: T, with a minimum of 99 percent passing through No. 8 sieve and 
a minimum of 75 percent passing through No. 60 sieve. 
2. Class: O, with a minimum of 95 percent passing through No. 8 sieve and 
a minimum of 55 percent passing through No. 60 sieve. 
3. Provide lime in form of ground dolomitic limestone. 


B. Sulfur: Granular, biodegradable, and containing a minimum of 90 percent 
sulfur, with a minimum of 99 percent passing through No. 6 sieve and a 
maximum of 10 percent passing through No. 40 sieve. 
C. Iron Sulfate: Granulated ferrous sulfate containing a minimum of 20 
percent iron and 10 percent sulfur. 
D. Aluminum Sulfate: Commercial grade, unadulterated. 
E. Agricultural Gypsum: Minimum 90 percent calcium sulfate, finely ground 
with 90 percent passing through No. 50 sieve. 






 ORGANIC SOIL AMENDMENTS 

A. Organic matter: Commercially prepared compost. Well-composted, stable, 
and weed-free organic matter, pH range of 5.5 to 8; moisture content 35 
to 55 percent by weight; 100 percent passing through 3/4 inch sieve. 
1. Organic Matter Content: 50 to 60 percent of dry weight. 
2. Feedstock: Agricultural, food, or industrial residuals; biosolids; 
yard trimmings; or source-separated or compostable mixed solid waste. 


B. Wood derivatives: Decomposed, nitrogen-treated sawdust, ground bark, or 
wood waste; of uniform texture and free of chips, stones, sticks, soil, 
or toxic materials. 
C. Manure: Well-rotted, unleached, stable or cattle manure containing not 
more than 25 percent by volume of straw, sawdust, or other bedding 
materials; free of toxic substances, stones, sticks, soil, weed seed, 
debris, and material harmful to plant growth. 






 TURF FERTILIZERS 

A. Soil Test: Evaluate existing soil conditions and requirements prior to 
fertilizer selection and application to minimize the use of all 
fertilizers and chemical products. Obtain approval of Contracting 
Officer’s Representative for allowable products, product alternatives, 
scheduling and application procedures. Evaluate existing weather and site 







conditions prior to application. Apply products during favorable weather 
and site conditions according to manufacturer's written instructions and 
warranty requirements. Fertilizers to be registered and approved by EPA, 
acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, and of type recommended by 
manufacturer applicable to specific areas as required for Project 
conditions and application. Provide commercial grade turf fertilizers, 
free flowing, uniform in composition and conforms to applicable state and 
federal regulations. 
B. Commercial Fertilizer: Commercial-grade complete fertilizer of neutral 
character, consisting of slow-release nitrogen, 50 percent derived from 
natural organic sources of urea formaldehyde, phosphorous, and potassium 
in the following composition: 
1. Composition shall be nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium in amounts 
recommended in soil reports from a qualified soil-testing laboratory. 


C. Slow-Release Fertilizer: Granular or pellet fertilizer consisting of 50 
percent water-insoluble nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in the 
following composition: 
1. Composition shall be nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium in amounts 
recommended in soil reports from a qualified soil-testing laboratory. 








 PLANTING SOILS 

A. Existing Planting Soil: Existing, native surface topsoil formed under 
natural conditions retained during excavation process and stockpiled onsite. 
Verify suitability of native surface topsoil to produce viable 
planting soil. Clean soil of roots, plants, sod, stones, clay lumps, and 
other extraneous materials harmful to plant growth. 
1. Supplement with imported planting soil when quantities are 
insufficient. 
2. Mix existing, native surface topsoil with the following soil 
amendments and fertilizers as recommended by the soils analysis. 


B. Imported Planting Soil: Imported topsoil or manufactured topsoil from 
off-site sources can be used if sufficient topsoil is not available on 
site to meet the depth as specified herein. The Contractor shall furnish 
imported topsoil. At least 10 days prior to topsoil delivery, notify the 
Contracting Officer’s Representative of the source(s) from which topsoil 
is to be furnished. Obtain imported topsoil displaced from naturally 
well-drained construction or mining sites where topsoil occurs at least 4 
inchesdeep; do not obtain from agricultural land, bogs, or marshes. 







 WATER 

A. Water shall not contain elements toxic to plant life. Water to be 
obtained from local water utility company at no cost to the Contractor. 






 TURF SELECTIONS 

A. Grasses shall be: 
1. Tifway 419 Bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon) 








 SOD 

A. Sod: Certified Number 1 Quality/Premium, including limitations on thatch, 
weeds, diseases, nematodes, and insects, complying with "Specifications 
for Turfgrass Sod Materials" in TPI's "Guideline Specifications to 
Turfgrass Sodding". Furnish viable sod of uniform density, color, and 
texture, strongly rooted, and capable of vigorous growth and development 
when planted. 






 PESTICIDES 

A. Consider IPM (Integrated Pest Management) practices to minimize the use 
of all pesticides and chemical products. Obtain approval of Chief 
Engineer for allowable products, product alternatives, scheduling and 
application procedures. Evaluate existing weather and site conditions 
prior to application. Apply products during favorable weather and site 
conditions according to manufacturer's written instructions and warranty 
requirements. Pesticides to be registered and approved by EPA, acceptable 
to authorities having jurisdiction, and of type recommended by 
manufacturer for each specific problem and as required for Project 
conditions and application. Do not use restricted pesticides unless 
authorized in writing by authorities having jurisdiction. 
B. Post-Emergent Herbicide (Selective and Non-Selective): Effective for 
controlling weed growth that has already germinated. 






 EXECUTION 

 EXAMINATION 

A. Examine areas to receive turf for compliance with requirements and 
conditions affecting installation and performance. 
1. Verify that no foreign or deleterious material or liquid such as 
paint, paint washout, concrete slurry, concrete layers or chunks, 
cement, plaster, oils, gasoline, diesel fuel, paint thinner, 
turpentine, tar, roofing compound, or acid has been deposited in soil 
within a planting area. 
2. Do not mix or place soils and soil amendments in frozen, wet, or muddy 
conditions. 









3. Suspend soil spreading, grading, and tilling operations during periods 
of excessive soil moisture until the moisture content reaches 
acceptable levels to attain the required results. 
4. Uniformly moisten excessively dry soil that is not workable and which 
is too dusty. 
5. Special conditions may exist that warrant a variance in the specified 
planting dates or conditions. Submit a written request to the 
Contracting Officer’s Representative stating the special conditions 
and proposal variance. 


B. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been 
corrected. 
C. If contamination by foreign or deleterious material or liquid is present 
in soil within a planting area, remove the soil and contamination as 
directed by Contracting Officer’s Representative and replace with new 
planting soil. 






 PREPARATION 

A. Protect structures, utilities, sidewalks, pavements, and other facilities 
and turf areas and existing plants from damage caused by planting 
operations. 
B. Install erosion control measures to prevent erosion or displacement of 
soils and discharge of soil bearing water runoff or airborne dust to 
adjacent properties and walkways. 






 TURF AREA PREPARATION AND GRADING 

A. For newly graded subgrades loosen subgrade to a minimum depth of 4 
inches. Remove stones larger than 1 inch in any dimension and sticks, 
roots, rubbish, and other extraneous matter and legally dispose of them 
off Owner's property. 
1. Apply fertilizer, lime, and/or soil amendments directly to subgrade 
before loosening, at rates recommended by the soils analysis. 
2. Spread topsoil, apply soil amendments and fertilizer on surface, and 
thoroughly blend planting soil. 
3. Spread planting soil to a depth of 4 inches but not less than required 
to meet finish grades after light rolling and natural settlement. Do 
not spread if planting soil or subgrade is frozen, muddy, or 
excessively wet. 
a. Spread approximately 1/2 the thickness of planting soil over 
loosened subgrade. Mix thoroughly into top 2 inches of subgrade. 
Spread remainder of planting soil. 











b. Reduce elevation of planting soil to allow for soil thickness of 
sod. 




B. Finish grade planting areas to a smooth, uniform surface plane with 
loose, uniformly fine texture. Grade to within plus or minus 1/2 inch of 
finish elevation. Roll and rake, remove ridges, and fill depressions to 
meet finish grades. Limit finish grading to areas that can be planted in 
the immediate future. 






 SODDING 

A. Lay sod within 24 hours of harvesting. Do not lay sod if dormant or if 
ground is frozen or muddy. 
B. Lay sod to form a solid mass with tightly fitted joints. Butt ends and 
sides of sod; do not stretch or overlap. Stagger sod strips or pads to 
offset joints in adjacent courses. Avoid damage to subgrade or sod 
during installation. Tamp and roll lightly to ensure contact with 
subgrade, eliminate air pockets, and form a smooth surface. Work sifted 
soil or fine sand into minor cracks between pieces of sod; remove excess 
to avoid smothering sod and adjacent grass. 
1. Lay sod across angle of slopes exceeding 1:3. 
2. Anchor sod on slopes exceeding 1:6 with biodegradable staples spaced 
as recommended by sod manufacturer but not less than 2 anchors per sod 
strip to prevent slippage. 


C. Saturate sod with fine water spray within two hours of planting. During 
first week after planting, water daily or more frequently until sod is 
established. 






 TURF RENOVATION 

A. Replace existing turf damaged by Contractor's operations, such as storage 
of materials or equipment and movement of vehicles. 
1. Reestablish turf where settlement or washouts occur or where minor 
regrading is required. 
2. Install new planting soil as required. 


B. Remove sod and vegetation from diseased or unsatisfactory turf areas; do 
not bury in soil. 
C. Remove topsoil containing foreign materials such as oil drippings, fuel 
spills, stones, gravel, and other construction materials resulting from 
Contractor's operations, and replace with new planting soil. 
D. Remove waste and foreign materials, including weeds, soil cores, grass, 
vegetation, and turf, and legally dispose of them off Owner's property. 







E. Till stripped, bare, and compacted areas thoroughly to a soil depth of 6 
inches. 
F. Apply soil amendments and initial fertilizers required for establishing 
new turf and mix thoroughly into top 4 inches of existing soil. Install 
new planting soil to fill low spots and meet finish grades. 
G. Apply sod as required for new turf. 
H. Water newly planted areas and keep moist until new turf is established. 






 TURF MAINTENANCE 

A. Maintain and establish turf by watering, fertilizing, weeding, mowing, 
trimming, replanting, and performing other operations as required to 
establish healthy, viable turf. Roll, regrade, and replant bare or 
eroded areas and remulch to produce a uniformly smooth turf. Provide 
materials and installation the same as those used in the original 
installation. 
1. Fill in as necessary soil subsidence that may occur because of 
settling or other processes. Replace materials and turf damaged or 
lost in areas of subsidence. 
2. In areas where mulch has been disturbed by wind or maintenance 
operations, add new mulch and anchor as required to prevent 
displacement. 
3. Apply treatments as required to keep turf and soil free of pests and 
pathogens or disease. Use IPM (Integrated Pest Management) practices 
whenever possible to minimize the use of pesticides and reduce 
hazards. 


B. Install and maintain temporary piping, hoses, and turf-watering equipment 
to convey water from sources and to keep turf uniformly moist to a depth 
of 4 inches. 
1. Schedule watering to prevent wilting, puddling, erosion, and 
displacement of seed or mulch. Lay out temporary watering system to 
avoid walking over muddy or newly planted areas. 
2. Water turf with fine spray at a minimum rate of 1 inch per week unless 
rainfall precipitation is adequate. 


C. Mow turf as soon as top growth is tall enough to cut. Repeat mowing to 
maintain specified height without cutting more than 1/3 of grass height. 
Remove no more than 1/3 of grass-leaf growth in initial or subsequent 
mowings. Do not delay mowing until grass blades bend over and become 
matted. Do not mow when grass is wet. Schedule initial and subsequent 
mowings to maintain the following grass height: 







1. Mow sod to a height of 1 to 2 inches. 








 SATISFACTORY TURF 

A. Turf installations shall meet the following criteria as determined by 
Contracting Officer’s Representative: 
1. Satisfactory Sodded Turf: At end of maintenance period, a healthy, 
well-rooted, even-colored, viable turf has been established, free of 
weeds, open joints, bare areas, and surface irregularities. 


B. Use specified materials to reestablish turf that does not comply with 
requirements and continue maintenance until turf is satisfactory. 






 PESTICIDE APPLICATION 

A. Apply pesticides and other chemical products and biological control 
agents in accordance with authorities having jurisdiction and 
manufacturer's written recommendations. Coordinate applications with 
Owner's operations and others in proximity to the Work. Notify 
Contracting Officer’s Representative before each application is 
performed. 
B. Post-Emergent Herbicides (Selective and Non-Selective): Applied only as 
necessary to treat already-germinated weeds and in accordance with 
manufacturer's written recommendations. 






 CLEANUP AND PROTECTION 

A. During planting, keep adjacent paving and construction clean and work 
area in an orderly condition. 
B. Promptly remove soil and debris created by turf work from paved areas. 
Clean wheels of vehicles before leaving site to avoid tracking soil onto 
roads, walks, or other paved areas. 
C. Erect temporary fencing or barricades and warning signs, as required to 
protect newly planted areas from traffic. Maintain fencing and 
barricades throughout initial maintenance period and remove after turf 
is established. 
D. Remove nondegradable erosion control measures after grass establishment 
period. 
E. Remove surplus soil and waste material including excess subsoil, 
unsuitable soil, trash, and debris and legally dispose of them off 
Owner's property. 






--- END --- 


 

SAMPLE 

 

 

 

 

 

CONSTRUCTION INDOOR AIR QUALITY 

MANAGEMENT PLAN 

 

 

LEED EQ Credit 3.1 Construction IAQ Plan During Construction 

 

 LEED EQ Credit 3.2 Construction IAQ Plan Before Occupancy 

 

 

FOR 

 

Outpatient Speciality Clinic 

 

 

 

 

 

Goal 

 

The goal set for this project team is to provide an Indoor Air Quality Management Plan that will 
prevent indoor air quality problems resulting from the construction process and sustain long term 
health and comfort for construction workers and building occupants. 

 


Overview 

 

The Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Management Plan must be developed and implemented for both 
construction and pre-occupancy phases of the building in order to meet this goal. This plan must 
also meet or exceed the minimum requirements of the Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning 
National Contractors Association IAQ Guideline for Occupied Buildings under Construction, 
1995 (Chapter 3) 

 

 

IAQ Management Plan, During Construction 

LEED IEQ Credit 3.1 (1 Credit) 

 

 

Methodology 

There are many methods available to the contractor for maintaining the indoor air quality during 
the construction process. This sample plan provides strategies to achieve the five requirements 
of SMACNA's IAQ Management for Occupied Buildings under Construction. 

 


1. HVAC Protection 


Protection of all HVAC equipment must be provided to prevent dust and odors from adhering 
to the porous materials in the HVAC system, which can be released later once the building is 
enclosed. Specific requirements for the HVAC protection must be examined on both return 
and supply sides. 

 

a. The Return Side 




The entire system will be shut down during heavy construction and demolition. 
All return air openings in the construction area are to be sealed with plastic. 
When the system must remain operational during construction, temporary filters 
will be added when necessary. Temporary filters with a MERV 8 value will be 
utilized (taped in place) at all air grills 

 

 

and riser openings at each plenum and at AHU unit. The mechanical room will 
not be used for storage of construction or waste materials. 

 

b. The Supply Side 




Ducts, diffusers and VAV boxes to be sealed in plastic for further protection. 
Ducts and diffusers will be inspected upon completion of work by the Quality 
Control Manager for any significant dust deposits and cleaned where needed. 

 

c. Monitoring Filtration 




Filtration will be reviewed on a weekly basis and inspected for loading and 
replacement as required by the Quality Control Manager. The Quality Control 
Manager will also maintain a log noting the replacement and date of replacement 
of each filter. If air handlers are being used during construction, filtration media 
with a Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) of 8 must be used at each 


return air grill, as determined by ASHRAE 52.2 – 1999. All 
filtration media will be replaced immediately prior to 
occupancy. Filtration media installed at the end of construction shall have a 
Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) of 13, as determined by 
ASHRAE 5.2-1999. 

 


d. Storage of Materials 




All materials will be stored off site and delivered to the project on an as need 
basis in effort to prevent contamination. In the event materials are staged for a 
short period of time, the materials will be stored on dunnage and covered with 
plastic when not being used. 

 

e. Installation of Duct Runs 




As the installation of the ductwork system progresses, all open ends will be 
covered in plastic and sealed to prevent contaminants from entering. 

 

f. Subcontractor Accountability 




These requirements are incorporated into all subcontracts and monitored by the 
project team. 

 

g. Duct Cleaning 




 

 

 

 

If there is any evidence of dust or debris in ductwork, it will be immediately 
cleaned and will be inspected by the Quality Control Manager before installation. 

 

2. Source Control 

Effective pollution control begins with maintaining the pollution at the product’s source. 
There are many options available to the contractor. 

 

a. Product Substitution 


Subcontractors will be responsible for forwarding product information including 
emission data and VOC (volatile organic compound). Any product not meeting 
VOC limits will not be used and Subcontractor will be responsible for providing 
substitution to meet requirements. 

 

Examples of low VOC products include, but are not limited to: paints, sealants, 
adhesives, and composite woods. Specific VOC allowable levels for each 
material will be included in the project specifications. 

 


b. Different methodologies 


There are some instances during construction when product substitution will not 
meet the low VOC (low volatile organic compound) requirement. In these 
instances, the product will be applied off site, leaving sufficient time for material 


to off gas, and then installing the scope of work. Staining of 
wood and adhering metal cladding to plywood are some 
instances. 

 

c. Cover or Seal 


Containers of wet products will be kept closed when not in use. Waste materials 
that can release dust or odor will be covered or sealed or will be removed from the 
site promptly to storage and collection areas outside the building. These 
receptacles are located onsite to allow for frequent disposal without 
compromising efficiency. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 3. Pathway Interruption 

 

During construction temporary barriers will be erected to contain the construction area and 
prevent dust from entering clean, completed or occupied spaces. 

 

4. Housekeeping 

 

The contractors will use several methods of housekeeping to prevent dust from becoming 
airborne if disturbed during construction or clean up. These methods include: 

 

a. Using sweeping compounds to contain dust during clean-up 
b. Floors will be swept and cleaned often to prevent dust accumulation 
c. Remove accumulated water and keep work areas dry as possible 
d. Protect porous materials from moisture exposure 
e. Maintain mechanical rooms clean from dust and material storage 
f. All coils, air filters, and fans shall be cleaned before performing testing and 
balancing procedures and especially before conducting baseline air quality test 
by responsible subcontractor. 


 

5. Scheduling 

 


To provide control of indoor air quality, this project will ensure construction activity and 
building occupancy do not overlap. Construction sequencing will be specified to reduce 
absorption of VOC’s (volatile organic compounds) by porous materials (i.e. applications of 
wet and odorous materials such as paints, sealants and coatings will be applied before 
installing absorbent materials such as ceiling tile, carpets, and fabric-covered furnishings). 

 

 

Monitoring 

 


To monitor and ensure the IAQ plan is being upheld, this project will appoint 
IAQ Team members and assign responsibilities for regular inspections. Some 
of the responsibilities of this team include: 

 

Checking labels and submittal data for chemical make-up of interior finish materials including 
paint, wall coverings, adhesives, particle board, plastics, carpet, cleaning compounds 

 

 

 

Monitor any water infiltration and plumbing leaks 

 

Avoid use of materials with formaldehyde such as particleboard 

 

Photographs will be taken during the construction process (at a minimum on three different 
occasions during construction) showing the consistent adherence to the credit requirements and 
SMACNA guidelines (example: storage of moisture sensitive materials, change out or inspection 
of filtration media, protection of ductwork). Photographs will include identification of the 
SMACNA approach being featured. 

 

Indoor Air Quality Management, Before Occupancy 

 

Path 1 Pre-Occupancy Outside Air Flush 

After construction ends, prior to occupancy and with all interior finishes installed, install new 
filtration media and perform a building flush-out by supplying a total air volume of 14,000 cubic 
feet of outdoor air per square foot (4,500 cubic meters of outdoor air per square meter) of floor 
area while maintaining an internal temperature of at least 60° F (15° C) and relative humidity no 
higher than 60%. 

 


Path 2 IAQ Testing 

Conduct baseline IAQ testing after construction ends and prior to occupancy using testing 
protocols consistent with the EPA Compendium of Methods for the Determination of Air 
Pollutants in Indoor Air or the ISO method listed in the table below. Testing may be done in 
accordance with one standard; project teams may not mix requirements from the EPA 
Compendium of Methods with ISO. Demonstrate that the contaminant maximum concentrations 
listed below are not exceeded: 

 

Contaminant Maximum Concentration EPA Compendium method ISO method 

Formaldehyde 27 parts per billion IP-6 ISO 16000-3 

Particulates (PM10) 50 micrograms per cubic meter IP-10 ISO 7708 

Total volatile organic 500 micrograms per cubic meter IP-1 ISO 16000-6 

compounds (TVOCs) 

4-Phenylcyclohexene *6.5 micrograms per cubic meter IP-1 ISO 16000-6 

(4-PCH) 
Carbon monoxide 9 parts per million and no greater IP-3 ISO 4224 

(CO) than 2 parts per million above outdoor levels 

 


*This test is required only if carpets and fabrics with styrene butadiene rubber (SBR) latex backing are 
installed as part of the base building systems. 

 

For each sampling point where the maximum concentration limits are exceeded, conduct an 
additional flush-out with outside air and retest the noncompliant concentrations. Repeat until all 
requirements are met. When retesting noncompliant building areas, take samples from the same 
locations as in the first test. 

 

 

Conduct the air sample testing as follows: 

 

 All measurements must be conducted prior to occupancy, but during normal 
occupied hours with the building ventilation system started at the normal 
daily start time and operated at the minimum outside air flow rate for the 
occupied mode throughout the test. 

 All interior finishes must be installed, including but not limited to millwork, 
doors, paint, carpet and acoustic tiles. Movable furnishings such as 
workstations and partitions must be in place. 

 The number of sampling locations will depend on the size of the building and 
number of ventilation systems. The number of sampling locations must 
include the entire building and all representative situations. Include areas with 
the least ventilation and greatest presumed source strength. 

 Air samples must be collected between 3 and 6 feet (1 and 2 meters) from the 
floor to represent the breathing zone of occupants, and over a minimum 4- 
hour period. 

 

 


